+++
date = '2012-09-16T23:02:36-06:00'
draft = false
title = 'Landmark Forum / est Glossary'
description = 'Basic Definitions of Landmark Forum Terms (*Not Endorsed or Approved by Landmark*)'
type = 'post'
tags = ["thought", "philosophy", "self-development"]
+++
#### DISCLAIMER NOTE: The views expressed on this blog are my personal views, and are not the views of Landmark. Refer to this site's [Terms of Use](https://julianwest.me/Blog/site-disclosure/) for further details.

# Landmark Education Glossary

## Table of Contents
- [Preface](#preface)
- [Special Notes](#special-notes)
- [Terminology](#terminology)
- [Definitions](#definitions)
- [FAQ](#faq)


## Preface

<i>This page is a companion document to my 3-part special write-up revisiting <b><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landmark_Worldwide#Landmark_Forum">The Landmark Forum</a></b> in 2009: <b><a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-1/">Part 1</a>, <a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-2/">Part 2</a>, and <a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-3/">Part 3</a></b></i><br />

These definitions include a *modified fork* of the original [Landmartian Terms Page - Wiki University](https://en.wikiversity.org/w/index.php?title=Landmark_Education%2FAbd%2FGlossary&oldid=1963288), a Landmark Graduate-created page no longer maintained and ***not*** endorsed by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com). <br />

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: The definitions on this page are my own work product (using afforementioned resources) and are ***not*** reviewed or approved by Landmark Worldwide.

## Special Notes

**Special Note 1**: The *intended audience* here is ***limited only to***: **Landmark Forum** ***Graduates*** seeking a refresher, or academic researchers. It is ***not*** to be used, *cited*, or linkback-referenced by those with any ax to grind (*or* [*Racket*](#racket)) with [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com)!  If you bring traffic here from a hate content page, I will see it in the logs and block you. The *only* points-of-view about Landmark expressed here are those from my articles above, or personal unbiased side-notes below. The terms are my own *personal interpretation* of [***The Landmark Forum***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landmark_Worldwide#Landmark_Forum) technology, sourced from 30 year-old notes and the above-referenced Wiki University page.  Nothing more.  <br />

**Special Note 2 *About The Definitions* And *Why* They're Presented**: Every discipline has its own language, borrowing general terms and providing their own *specific*, *distinct meanings*. We usually call it "***jargon***". **For example**, in **physics** the words "*force*", "*work*", and "*power*" are all given *specific meanings* for mathematical modeling to work consistently. So while "***work***" means ***force through a distance*** in physics, the common term of "***work***" means ***applying effort***, either mental or physical, for any layman. **To a physicist**, however, pressing as hard as you can against a wall and *not moving it* = **no work**; but to everyone else listening to the physicist, it was *possibly* ***a lot*** *of useless work*! That stupid doctor exerted *a lot* of effort to no affect!  **So every discipline has its own language, and** ***so it is*** **with** ***Landmark*** **and why this Definitions page exists**.  **The Landmark Forum's** 3-day course borrows words from *common language*, and gives specific meanings in order to communicate new ideas. Every [**NLP system**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming) and [**LGATs**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training) has this trait, and this page sets out to help give definition and context to **The Landmark Forum** terms.<br />

**Personal Side Note**: I of course am familiar with published criticisms of Landmark, how it is an [**LGATs**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training), how it leverages [NLP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming), etc.  I address criticisms in my 3-part blog series (mini-memoir) found above under the [**Preface**](#preface) section. <br />

Terms with "&trade;" or "&reg;" are trademarked or registered properties of [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), are openly used in their public literature, and are only referenced here for complete Definitions.  All rights to these terms belong to Landmark Education and [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and no authorship or ownership is claimed in *any* way.

## Terminology

**Terms and Definitions here are Landmark Grad-written and *not* endorsed or *approved* by Landmark Worldwide**. *At all*.  This resource is intended to briefly cover the [***Ontology***](#ontology) used by Forum Leaders during the 3-day seminar, by Landmark Forum graduates in the Landmark community.  This page does *not* propose (or state) that any of these definitions are the "correct" *meanings* of Landmark's terminology. *At all*. <br />

Commonly-defined *Terms* get used by Landmark Worldwide in *special ways* even after The Landmark Forum course, and sometimes there is confusion. For example, the term "*enrollment*" is officially defined as "*enrolling*" others in a *possibility*, so that they are "moved, touched, or inspired" by any *breakthroughs* that you share with them.  So it does *not* technically mean "*enrolling people into courses*", which is often the common and easy misnomer (the word you'd be looking for there, is "*Registration*" referring to the context of actually signing up for a course (the generic meaning in the training is *the acceptance of an offered choice*, but it is also used with the ordinary meaning, i.e, action to formally place one's name in a list of "registrants."). <br />

Feel free to write-in definitions for me, if you see something here that needs adjusment or amending.  If you are related to the Landmark Forum, feel free to send brief comments or alternative definitions.

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: These definitions are my own, and have ***not*** been reviewed or approved by Landmark Worldwide.

## Definitions
<a id="act"></a>
<a id="aal"></a>
• ***Act***. An act is an ***inauthentic*** way of ***being*** that you project to others to *make yourself look good*; or (motivated by *being right*) a manner you take on for yourself *in furtherance of your own* desired self-image or as part of your [***strong suit***](#strongsuit). Many guys, for example, think of themselves as "tough guys", and perhaps should take a closer look at ways in which they really *are not* "*tough*". True tough guys don't need to prove it by treating people badly. Truly wealthy people don't need to prove it by ostentatious lifestyles. You may like to think of yourself as a responsible person, or as a generous person, but *are you*? You may like to show up for others as an extroverted or outgoing person, but if you're always feeling a need to prove it...it's simply an [***Act***](#act). <br />
• ***Already always listening***.&trade;  Undistinguished *pre-existing interpretations* that shape, color and influence the way people *experience* their relationships with other people, circumstances, and *even themselves*. AAL is that "little voice in your head" that is finishing other peoples' sentences, the voice of your imagination, and the *interpretations* you're constantly making. Recognizing and changing *your* ***Listening*** is a huge concept (and end goal) in the Landmark Forum. <br />
• ***Advanced Course***(s). The next immediate course, which now appears to be selection of courses you can choose from.  When I attended, the immediate second required course was *fixed* as you needed to complate that Advanced Course as part of what Landmark called the "[***Curriculum for Living***](#curriculum)."  I never attended beyond the original 3-day Landmark Forum, mainly due to work projects and family obligations.<br />
<a id="at-cause"></a>
• ***Aliveness***. A sense of being *fully aware*, fully *present* and fully *yourself*.  It is a **state of** ***being*** that Landmark Forum wants to help you deliver for yourself. <br />
<a id="at-effect"></a>
• ***At Cause***. **Taking responsibility for** ***how you experience*** **and** ***respond*** **to events**, believing you can generate new possibilities *rather than* being *limited* by old [*stories*](#stories) or external constraints. “**Cause**” = You create your experience. *See also* [***At Effect***](#at-effect).  <br />
• ***At Effect***. Feeling that you are at the mercy of (or “victimized by”) external events, other people’s decisions, or your own past *stories* and beliefs. Usage is "at *the effect of* ***some circumstance***"; to be a victim of circumstances (or even be *dependent upon some circumstance* for success). “**Effect**”= You are responding automatically to external triggers. *See also* [***At Cause***](#at-cause).<br />
<a id="breakthrough"></a>
• ***Authenticity***. When one is being consistent with how they portray themselves to be with others and themselves. <br />
• ***Breakthrough***. Freeing yourself from some limitation that allows you to achieve immediate and permanent quantum leaps in performance and quality of life. When "the light bulb clicks on in your head" and you "get it", and it causes a discrete change in behavior.  Breakthroughs are one of the first results building towards [***Transformation***](#transformation). <br />
• ***Breakdown***. A *breakdown* happens when some *possibility*, *intention* or *commitment* is frustrated, stopped or thwarted.  When things don't go as expected or intended, or when you don't do as you said you would -- "not keeping your word" (also known as *a loss of* ***Integrity***), a *breakdown* has occured.<br />
• ***Complete***. When one is *complete* with any aspect of the past and therefore the past has no constraint on who one is being or how they are acting in the *present*. In communication, *being complete* is one being left with no *lingering resentments*, *regrets* or "*unfinished business*".<br />
<a id="cost"></a>
• ***Cost***. (as used in [***Rackets***](#racket)&trade;). The impact of one’s reactive ways of *being* and acting. *See also* [***Payoff***](#payoff). The *costs* of [***Rackets***](#racket)&trade; are *love/affinity*, *vitality/well-being*, *self-expression*, and *satisfaction/fulfillment*, all of which fall under [***Aliveness***](#aliveness).<br />
<a id="choose-decide"></a>
• ***Change***. (*versus* [*Transformation*](#transformation)). ***Change*** begins with a something that is ***made different*** *in distance* (from *here* to *there*), or *in time* (from *now* to *then*) or *in form* (for example, from a *square* to a *circle*). An aspect of the nature of ***change*** is that **change causes the persistence** ***of the something being changed***. ***Change*** is a *gradual*, *continual shift*. [***Transformation***](#transformation), on the other hand, is a *discrete jump*: a caterpillar ***transforms*** into a moth or butterfly, but the *metamorphosis* that happens *in the cocoon* is ***change***. Improvement and evolution are **in the world of** ***change***. ***Transformation*** is about something entirely ***new***, ***different***, a ***creation***. So **Change = a+1** , **Transformation = before was A, now is B**.<br />
• ***Choosing vs. Deciding***. ***Deciding*** is a word related to *other* "&ast;cide" words (suicide, insecticide, genocide), and is the result of ***applying reason*** to eliminate alternatives, effectively *killing them*. Usually a *single thing* is left and that becomes ***the decision***. ***Choosing***, on the other hand, is about **making a choice** purely for the *sake of choosing*, ***not*** applying reason, not applying logic, not removing or disqualifying the other choices. Choices dont run out in life, only your decisions make you run out of choices.  At the bottom of every decision is either fundamental choice or reason: "I choose to believe ..." or "I choose to trust ..." adding "*because*" makes it a *reason*. By using reason, you *absolve yourself from responsibility for the choice*: it becomes the fault of the *reason* or the *reasoning process* if it fails. Choice demands ***responsibility*** for *making* the choice. <br />
• ***Clearing***. The most common analogy is of a field, and removing the stones and stumps and whatever obstacles are there in the field, that interfere with the functioning of the field: whether to grow something, or to play a game, or something else. The abstraction in this case is a mental construct in which possibilities can be placed, created. The clearing is like a vacuum, and can draw things towards it. If the thing in the clearing is "I'm no good" then it draws things that supports that attitude. You are then a clearing for "I'm no good". If you want the possibility of contribution to the world to be in your clearing, to draw those flavors of possibilities and opportunities, then you would need to remove the "I'm no good" thing from your clearing. <br />
<a id="curriculum"></a>
• ***Context***. Context is your *occurring world*; the total of how the world around you, and the people and things in it (either in totality, or in a given situation), show up for you. Nearly all context in which humans live is created. As a "meaning-making machine", it forms the setting and the background of your story and you tend to take actions based upon it in response. And you take it for granted and don't realize it: the one thing your occurring world doesn'tautomatically occur for you as is context. For example, for a fish, water is a major part of his context. A fish has no appreciation of water, it's just there, life consists of dealing with it all the time, he 'swims in it'. No other fish has ever been out of water for any length of time and come back to tell him what it's like, so the fish doesn't know anything but water, and nothing else is possible to him. (The difference is, the fish's context of water is beneficial to him, and he can't overcome it and survive. You, however, might "swim in" a context that isn't altogether beneficial to you, and that you can overcome. By contrast, responsibility is an empowering context.) When your life sucks, when you're in a negative or disempowering context; the way to break out of it, to overcome the negative or disempowering context, is to distinguish something (see Distinguish, Distinction). Then you can see your disempowering story as a story, and take new action in alignment with reality; or take on one or more new ways of being that might work better for you. <br />
• ***Curriculum for Living***.&trade; The Landmark curriculum, which includes the original 3-Day **Landmark Forum** &reg;, The **Advanced Course** &reg;, The **Self Expression and Leadership Program**, and The **Landmark Forum In Action Series**. <br />
• ***Disappear***. To "*disappear something*" is to eliminate it, such as to *disappear a* ***Complaint***. *See also* [***Racket***](#racket). <br/>
• ***Distinction***. A *distinction* is a linguistic phenomenon that brings something *into being* as a presence, for which previously there was no presence. *Distinction* also comes from sublanguages created to facilitate an area of thought or information -- the example of physics I used above. A *distinction* is simply a ***term***, a *word* used to name something to ***facilitate the abstraction***, for the *discussion* and/or *use* of that thing. Being able to make distinctions is about the most critical aspect to getting anything out of **The Landmark Forum**.<br />
• **Distinguish**. To take something from an undifferentiated background and bring it to the foreground. Shinigami Realm
• **Effect**. See ***At effect***. <br />
• ***Empty***. Not *real*, *made up*, no substance. Generally used in conjunction with "meaningless" as in "**empty and meaningless**" and used in the "***Emtpy And Meaningless***" exercise.  See "***Meaningless***" below. <br />
• ***Enrollment***. A kind of sharing that causes a new possibility to be present for another such that they are touched moved and inspired by that new possibility. This is not to be confused with Registration. <br />
• [***The Landmark Forum***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landmark_Worldwide#Landmark_Forum). **An accelerated learning experience, set up as a guided dialog between the instructor and participants designed to bring about a transformational shift** ***in the participants***. Effectiveness and quality of life can become alterned, even Transformed, in three days. The first course that leads to the "[***Advanced Courses***](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com/advanced-programs/the-landmark-advanced-course) (the first one used to be called the ***Curriculum for Living*** but there are several you can choose from, now). **The Landmark Forum** &reg; ® is the *entry point* for all Landmark programs and ***Advanced Courses***. <br />
• ***Freedom***. A *state of* ***being***. Freedom comes from being at ease. Freedom comes from being effective. Experiencing Freedom comes from being generative (e.g. having conversations that are *possibility-based*).
• ***Graduate***. A person who has completed **The Landmark Forum**. <br />
• ***I***. What people tend to think of, in its capacity as an ***identity***, as being a collection of characteristics, attributes, and experiences from the past. Landmark tries to (at least *temporarily) get you to see and understand ***I*** **not** as a concept of *self*, but instead **just simply a pattern of neurons firing**.  This allows you, at least temporarily, work to view Events, Moments, and concepts of Identity differently. *See also* ***Identity***. <br />
• ***Identity***. A ***story*** that we invented about ourselves. The process of inventing an **Identity** begins in childhood, as we gradually adopted ways of being and acting to deal successfully with things that didn't quite go the way we thought they should. <br />
• ***Informative Learning***. *Learning* that increases what people know and adds to their skills by bringing new knowledge to an existing worldview and frame of reference. Compare to Transformative learning. <br />
• ***Integrity***. Integrity is a state or condition of being whole, perfect, complete and unimpaired, in perfect condition. For a person, integrity is a matter of a person’s word. The extent to which who you are reflects the person you intend to be.  Integrity is well defined in a dictionary and covers all usage in Landmark. It is presented, though, from a perspective of workability. The more workable, the more integrity, the less workable, there is a loss of integrity. Keeping ones word is associated with integrity -- agreeing with common usage -- but in Landmark, it is a progression. Not keeping your word means you were *inauthentic* about your word. Inauthenticity leads to unreliability, which reduces workability, and thus a loss of integrity. If you say you will be at a meeting at 5pm and show up at 5:10pm, there is inauthenticity, and there is the loss of 10 minutes of time, reducing the workability of the meeting, which may have to still end on time, so there is less time for discussion, information sharing, etc. which can lead to incompleteness, which reduces workability. Thus a lack of integrity, a loss of integrity, or simply, no integrity. <br />
<a id="life"></a>
• ***Life***.  *As in* "*yourself and your life*." Our entire set of relationships with people. <br />
<a id="listening"></a>
• ***Listening***.  In Landmark Education, "*Listening*" does include the action of actually listening to another person in the common sense, but also includes **a state of** ***being***. In this regard, the qualifying statements are similar to "... in your listening". This state of being is recognized as providing a coloration to your listening to what others are saying, and to what is happening around you, even if no sound is hitting your ears. It is the application of interpretation, and the recognition that we are always applying some sort of interpretation to our sensory input. By recognizing that we are applying color, and the color that is being applied, we can then choose that coloration. The state of being is referred to as "your clearing", and that clearing provides the coloration, the interpretation, and the responses produced. <br />
• ***Meaningless***. The *absence* of inherent meaning. Used in conjunction with "***empty***" as in "**empty and meaningless**", which comes up towards the end of the course during the "***Empty And Meaningless***" exercise. This sentiment comes from Ecclesiastes and other philosophical texts from several eras. ***Meaning*** **is the association of things with** ***other*** **things**. This is an action of interpretation, of creating "***story***" anytime we are in the act of ***making-meaning***.  Since it is *made up*, it is *not real*, and therefore *empty*. People tend to use "*meaning*" to ascribe substance and *value* to something. But since the meaning is *made up* (*empty*), it is really meaningless, *without substance*, and thus subject to *change*, *alteration*, *transformation*, or *disappearance* by you.  Being able to "*remove a meaning which does not serve you*" instead of the default subconcious act of being a ***Meaning-Making machine*** (see below) is one of the more powerful concepts taught during the 3-Day Landmark Forum course. <br />
• ***Meaning-Making Machines***. The Landmark Forum establishes that "***humans are meaning making machines***" on Day 1, which means: we assign meaning to *everything* that happens to us. ⁣*Everything*. The *problem*, Landmark states, is that most of the time meaning gets assigned *subconsciously*, and often we assign things a negative meaning. ⁣⁣That’s just the *nature of the human mind*: we go negative. ⁣And often, because we do this subconciously, we do not see when we're *creating-meaning* that is feeding an *interpratation*, or "*story*", of an external event or moment. And, again because we do *all* this subconciously and automatically, our "[***stories***](#story)" are often taken as *fact* --- not the *interpretations* that they *actually are* in ***reality***.  Getting this concept early, is basically the foundation for understanding concepts later on like [***Rackets***](#racket) and how they can rob us of [***Aliveness***](#aliveness). <br />
• ***Occur*** (often used in the *plural* form, as in "***how it occurs*** ...").  An active form "occurring" and in the past tense "how it occurred ..." . The interpretation of something. Occurring applies ***story***, *reason*, to [***what happened***](#what-happened), or to how you *think* about something. Occurring is a subconscious summarization and associative process that hits the conscious mind as *real*, as *truth*. It is difficult to recognize this without training. Someone yelling at you could occur as they being angry; or you thinking they think you are deaf, or stupid; or as an urgent notification of something you need to pay attention to; or something else. Thus when trying to describe [***what happened***](#what-happened), you may include that interpretation unknowingly, when it is really how it *occurred* to you. <br />
<a id="ontology"></a>
• ***Ontology*** (and/or ***Ontological***).  A set of *concepts* and *categories* in a subject area or *domain* that shows their properties and the *relations between them*. Ontology deals with the *nature of* ***being***. Landmark's emphasis on language and it's *ontology* is predicated upon the notion that humans think in language, and that mastering one's internal language is one key to living powerfully. It works when you use it, and can be incredibly effective. <br />
<a id="payoff"></a>
• ***Payoff***. A payoff is something one gets out of certain ways of being and acting that is not immediately obvious.<br />
• ***Pop***. There are no statistics on this, but it's generally understood that everyone who completes the Landmark Forum gets some manner of [*transformation*](#transformation). The *experience of it* is distinct from one person to the next. Some people experience a *more powerful transformation* in the Advanced Courses than their first original Landmark Forum. But Landmark says the bottom line is that if you participate in the program, you'll ***Pop*** -- meaning: you'll "***get it***".  An anology often used is: "when making popcorn, kernels all "**pop** at *different* times.  So if you stay with it, and honestly take what you get, you ***will pop***." <br />
<a id="possibility"></a>
• ***Possibility***. A phenomenon in language that creates a new future *right now*.  *Possibility* leaves us with ***Power*** and ***Freedom***. <br />
<a id="racket"></a>
• ***Power***. The rate at which an *intention* is turned into a *result*. Power comes from *possibility* and from being *authentic*. <br />
<a id="reality"></a>
• ***Racket***.&trade; A *persistent* ***complaint*** combined with a *fixed* way of ***being***. Rackets are maintained because of payoffs (see ***Payoff***) and persist until dropping the racket (and thus its associated cost) is chosen. <br />
<a id="reason"></a>
• ***Reality***. That which is ***real*** either ***independently of language*** (e.g., "***a car***"), and that which is ***real*** *only* ***in*** *language* (e.g., ***a concept***).  A proper understanding of how ***reality exists as a concept*** is *critical* to understanding the concepts covered in the ["***What Happened***"](#what-happened) terminology and exercises. <br />
• ***Reason***. An excuse we invent to justify choices we make. That would be Ambrose Bierce's definition. When choices are made according to "reasons," they are distinguished as the "machine" operating, based on assumptions about truth and reality. Genuine choice operates on another level. Reasoning is not denied, but distinguished as rooted in our [***stories***](#story) about reality. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs. *See also* [***Choosing vs Deciding***](#choose-decide) <br />
• ***Reasonable***. To justify *acting*, or ***not*** *acting*, based on [***reasons***](#reason) and ***justifications***.  *See also* [***Choosing vs. Deciding***](#choose-decide). The ability to *choose* when you want to be ***reaonable*** *or* ***unreasonable*** is one of the main key life-altering [*breakthroughs*](#breakthrough) that The Landmark Forum wants to impart to its Graduates. <br />
• ***Registration***. *See also* ***Enrollment***. Some action that registers a commitment to the future, for example registering for a gym membership.  <br />
• ***Resentment***. A poison people swallow hoping it will kill the other person. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs. [***Rackets***](#racket) are  <br />
• ***Responsibility***. This is a key area of the Landmark Forum that people can struggle with, and is one of the most difficult to explain to anyone who hasn't attended The Forum, so I will let founder [Werner Erhard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard) explain it in his terms: “Responsibility begins with the **willingness to** ***take the stand*** **that one is** ***cause in the matter of one’s life***. It is a ***declaration*** ***not*** an *assertion*, that is, it is a **context from which one chooses to** ***live***. Responsibility is ***not*** *burden*, *fault*, *praise*, *blame*, *credit*, *shame* or *guilt*. In ***Responsibility*** in Landmark, **there is no evaluation of** ***good*** **or** ***bad***, ***right*** **or** ***wrong***. **There is simply** ***what’s so***, **and** ***the stand you choose to take*** **on** ***what’s so***. **Being responsible** starts with the willingness to deal with a situation ***from the view*** of life that *you* are the *generator** of what *you* ***do***, what *you* ***have***. and what *you* ***are***. That is **not** "***the truth***". It is a *place to* ***stand***. No one can ***make you responsible***, nor can you ***impose responsibility*** *on another*. It is a grace you *give* ***yourself*** – an *empowering context* that leaves you with a *say in the matter of life*.” ([Werner Erhard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard))  <br />
• [***Self-Expression and Leadership Program***](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com/advanced-programs/self-expression-and-leadership-program). The final course in the [***Curriculum for Living***](#curriculum) &reg;, this program expands one’s natural capacity for providing leadership and making a difference as a natural self-expression. <br />
<a id="strongsuit"></a>
• ***Speaking into the listening***. Effectively communicating to another *such that* the **communication is** ***heard in the way in which the speaker intended***. <br />
• ***Stinginess***. Deliberately holding oneself, and one’s contribution, "close to the vest" and without generosity. <br />
<a id="story"></a>
• ***Stoicism***. Not directly related to The Landmark Forum curriculum or a term from the 3-day course; *however*, ***Stoicism*** as a philosophy informs the concepts of "[***At Cause***](#at-cause)" and "[***At Effect***](#at-effect)". <br />
• ***Story***. A "***story***" is an account or *interpretation* of past events often mistakenly taken for [**what actually** ***happened***](#what-happened).  “*She told a story*” does not mean “*she lied*.” Rather, any account (in our internal dialogue, or when talking to another perseon) is subconciously ***an interpretation***.  <br />
• ***Strong suit***. A way of ***being*** and ***acting*** that one relies on to produce results and make it in [***life***](#life). <br />
<a id="transformation"></a>
• ***Superstition***. The system of ideas, beliefs, social and cultural assumptions, and *taken-for-granted* conclusions (etc) through which an individual interprets and interacts with the world, other people, and himself or herself.  Living with others' *Dogma* and adhering to it, instead of living so to speak. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs. <br />
• ***Transformation***. The invention of a new realm of ***possibility*** for yourself and your life. The invention of the realm is a necessary condition, but not sufficient for transformation. Without resultant new actions in alignment with the possibilities populating the realm, the invention is just a mental exercise.<br />
• ***Transformative learning***. Transformative learning, gives people an awareness of the basic structures in which one knows, thinks, and acts in the world. From that awareness comes a fundamental shift that leaves people more fully in accord with their own possibilities and those of others. Transformative learning is contrasted with Informational Learning. Informational learning increases knowledge and ability. Transformative learning results in new perspectives and new abilities (and sometimes disabilities). The common example is of learning to ride a bicycle. Very little information is provided, like "pedal". Suddenly the learner gets balance and is able to ride the bike without help. They have discovered it for themselves, and may never loose the ability to ride a bike. The experience, the learning, transforms the person, their perspective and their abilities. Before they couldn't, now they can. And, a whole new world or realm of possibilities is opened up. <br />
• ***Unreasonable***. **Not** to be mistaken for *irrational*. To *be unreasonable* is to *go beyond* one’s *reasons*, *justifications* or lengthy *considerations* to *act* on something one is committed to. *See also* [***Choosing vs. Deciding***](#choose-decide) <br />
• ***Unreasonable Request***. A request that requires one to go *beyond* one’s reasons, justifications and considerations to act on something one is committed to.<br />
<a id="what-happened"></a>
• ***Vicious circle***.&trade; The human tendency to collapse [***what happened***](#what-happened) with **the** ***story we tell*** **ourselves (or others)** ***ABOUT what happened***. **The story** creates a clearing, a ***listening***, for *that which supports the story* (confirmation bias, etc), resulting in *more occurrences* of *things that further support* ***the story***, forming a self-supporting ***Vicious Circle***.<br />
• ***What Happened***. ***Consensual*** (agreed-on) shared **reality**, or "*objective*" **reality** aside from judgment, blame, right/wrong, good/bad, and *other forms of* "**meaning**." **What happens** ***occurs*** to us ***as it is analyzed*** our [***Already Always Listening***](#aal) to be good/bad, etc. If my ex-wife told me she had a problem with what I've done, that's ***what happened***. If I say that "*she was unreasonable*", ***that's my story about it***, **not** ***what happened***. *See also* [***Story***](#story). --NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs.  In our current era where ["*Alternative Facts*"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_facts) inflames all discussions requiring an agreed-upon [***reality***](#reality), successfully *working through* ***What Happened*** (for **The Forum's** purposes) is truly a challenge.<br />

Terms with "&trade;" or "&reg;" are trademarked or registered properties of [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), are openly used in their public literature, and are only referenced here for complete Definitions.  All rights to these terms belong to Landmark Education and [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and no authorship or ownership is claimed in *any* way.

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: The definitions on this page are my own work product (using afforementioned resources) and are ***not*** reviewed or approved by Landmark Worldwide.


## FAQ