+++
date = '2024-09-16T23:02:36-06:00'
draft = false
title = 'Landmark Forum / est Unofficial Glossary'
description = 'Basic & Informal Definitions of Landmark Forum Terms (*Not Endorsed/Approved by Landmark*)'
type = 'post'
tags = ["thought", "philosophy", "personal-development"]
+++
<a id="disclaimer"></a>

#### DISCLAIMER: The views expressed on this blog are my personal views, and are not the views of Landmark. Brand and product names are trademarks, or registered trademarks, of their respective owners.  Refer to this site's [Terms of Use](https://julianwest.me/Blog/site-disclosure/) for further details.

# Landmark Education Glossary

## Table of Contents
- [Preface](#preface)
- [Special Notes](#special-notes)
- [INTRO-Terminology](#terms)
- [Glossary](#definitions)
- [FAQ](#faq)


## Preface

<i>This page is a *companion piece* for my original 3-part special write-up revisiting my attendance of <b> <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landmark_Worldwide#Landmark_Forum">The Landmark Forum</a></b> (in 1994) originally published to this blog in 2009: <a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-1/"> Part 1</a>, <a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-2/">Part 2</a>, and <a href="https://julianwest.me/Blog/a-funny-thing-happened-after-the-forum-part-3/">Part 3</a></b></i>.  I regularly get asked questions about *word meanings* and *terminology* from readers of that 3-part write-up, even [fielding a few questions from FX's team behind "*The Americans*"](https://julianwest.me/Blog/the-americans-and-landmark/).  Those conversations led to this rough *Glossary* coming together.  I really have nothing *new* to add about my original **Landmark** write-ups that hasn't already been *said*, and I speak with no authority on this topic: just my own personal, unbiased and vivid memory of The **Landmark Forum**. <br />

The terms, phrases, and definitions below are a *modified fork* of this site: [Landmartian Glossary - Wiki University](https://en.wikiversity.org/w/index.php?title=Landmark_Education%2FAbd%2FGlossary&oldid=1963288)—a **Landmark** *Graduate-created* page no longer maintained and ***not*** endorsed by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com). <br />

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: terms and definitions on this page are my own personal work product (merging afforementioned resources with my own understanding of the material) and are ***not*** reviewed or approved by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com).

## Special Notes

**Special Note**: The ***intended audience*** for this page is *limited* ***only to*** **Landmark Forum** ***Graduates*** seeking a refresher, or non-biased/academic researchers. If you visited this page to make a decision about attending The **Landmark Forum**, ***don't***: see [**FAQ**](#faq) item #9. Non-Grads breezing these terms is folly, potentially a confusing word salad for any layman (see [**FAQ**](#faq) item #1).  This Glossary is also ***not*** intended to be used or *cited* by those with axes (*or* ***rackets*** lol) to grind with [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com).  The *only* points-of-view expressed here are focused *on* the terms themselves without judgement: for my personal analysis read [**my articles above**](#preface). These terms are my own *personal interpretations* of [***The Landmark Forum***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landmark_Worldwide#Landmark_Forum) technology, sourced from 30 year-old notes and the above-referenced Wiki University page. *Nothing more*. See the [***Disclaimer***](#disclaimer).  <br />

***Personal Side Note***: I am of course familiar with the published criticisms of **Landmark** as an [**LGAT**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training), how their training leverages [NLP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming), etc.  I discuss **Landmark** criticisms in my [**3-part blog series**](#preface) (a *mini-memoir* of sorts). This page is ***not*** about validating critics *or* fans of **Landmark**: it's purpose is for Graduates or researchers revisiting the terminology in an unbiased setting. See the [***Disclaimer***](#disclaimer).<br />

The terms, phrases, and definitions below are a *modified fork* of the original [Landmartian Glossary - Wiki University](https://en.wikiversity.org/w/index.php?title=Landmark_Education%2FAbd%2FGlossary&oldid=1963288), a **Landmark** *Graduate-created* page no longer maintained. That material and this page are ***not*** endorsed by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and *no authorship or ownership*—to any material in this unofficial Glossary—is claimed in *any* way!  See the [***Disclaimer***](#disclaimer).

<a id="terms"></a>

## INTRODUCTION - Terminology

Every discipline has its *own language* that borrows general terms and provides their own *specific*, *distinct concepts* or meanings. We usually call such terms "***jargon***" or a "***term of art***". **For example**, in [**physics**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Physics) the words "*force*", "*work*", and "*power*" are all given ***specific meanings*** for mathematical modeling to work consistently. So while "***work***" means ***force through a distance*** in physics, the common term of "***work***" means ***applying effort*** for the layman. **To a physicist**, however, pressing as *hard as you can* against a wall and *not moving it* = ***no work***; but to a layman listening to the physicist: it was *possibly* **a lot** ***of useless "work"***! **So every discipline has its own language or *terms of art***:  **and** ***so it is*** **with** **Landmark and why this page exists**.  **The Landmark Forum's** 3-day (and one evening) course borrows words from *common language*, and gives specific concepts to those words in order to communicate new ideas. Every [**NLP system**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming) and [**LGAT**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training) has "*terms of art*", and this page sets out to help give some understanding and context to **Landmark Forum** terms.<br />

Sometimes there is confusion with commonly-defined *Terms* as-used by **Landmark Worldwide**. **For example**: the term "***enrollment***" is officially defined as "*enrolling* others in a *possibility*", so that they are "moved, touched, or inspired" by any *breakthroughs* that you share with them. It has *no* relationship to people *registering* (signing-up) new attendees for **The Landmark Forum**; however, people often *confuse* the term "***enrolling***" with that very activity! <br />

**So terminology in this informal (and *unoffical*) Glossary should be taken as a *plastic***, ***moldable***, **thing** -- because **The Forum** is all about *language* as something that can be used *generatively*. For some people (maybe English majors?) that might be a bridge-too-far, and I get it!  <br />  

Feel free to send in any definitions (or corrections) if you see something here that needs adjusment, amending, or adding!  **If you are a representative of Landmark you are absolutely welcome to contact me anytime; *however*, please *have read* my** [**Disclaimer**](#disclaimer), **the final** [**FAQ**](#faq) **entry on this page**, ***and*** **this site's** [**Terms of Use**](https://julianwest.me/Blog/site-disclosure/) **prior to any contact**! 😉 <br />

**Terms and Definitions here are Landmark *Grad-written* and *not* endorsed or *approved* by Landmark Worldwide**. *At all* ([**Disclaimer**](#disclaimer)).  This resource is intended to briefly cover the [***Ontology***](#ontology) employed by Forum Leaders during the 3-day (and one evening) **Landmark Forum** seminar (and by **Landmark Forum** graduates in the community). This page does *not* propose (or state) that any definition is the "*correct*" *meaning* of *any* **Landmark** terminology. ***At all***. Terms or phrases with "&trade;" or "&reg;" are *trademarked* or *registered* properties of [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and are referenced from previously public literature, and only referenced from my own recollection. All rights to these terms belong to Landmark Education and [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and no authorship or ownership is claimed in *any* way. See the [***Disclaimer***](#disclaimer) for more information. <br />

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: These definitions are *my own* personal work product and have ***not*** been reviewed or approved by Landmark Worldwide.

<a id="definitions"></a>

## Unofficial Glossary / Definitions
<a id="act"></a>
<a id="aal"></a>
<a id="advanced"></a>
• <u><b><i>Act</i></b></u>. <small> An ***Act*** is an [***inauthentic***](#authenticity) **way of** [***being***](#being) that someone takes on-often *automatically*-to navigate social situations or personal insecurities.  You can ***act*** in ways that "*make yourself look good*"; or (motivated by [***being right***](#being-right)) a manner you take on for yourself *in furtherance of your own* desired self-image or as part of your [***strong suit***](#strongsuit).  People ***Act*** in accordance to different [***Contexts***](#context), **Example**: we have a professional "*face*", or ***Act***, that we project at our job. **Two further examples**: someone might adopt a “*tough guy*” stance to conceal fear or insecurity, or a “*people-pleaser*” persona to manage anxiety or *avoid conflict*. You may like to [***show up***](#shows-up) for others as an extroverted or outgoing person, but if you're always feeling a need to prove it...it's simply an ***Act***. </small> <br />
 <small> **Landmark** advocates *acknowledging* where you’re being [***inauthentic***](#authenticity) as a first-step to *becoming aware* of your "***Act***", and ***owning it***: “I realize I’m ***acting*** like everything’s under control, but truthfully I’m *anxious*.” This is a step in your journey of ultimately learning how to "*drop your* ***Act***" (covered more deeply in the ***Advanced Course***). "***Dropping the “Act***” means letting others see what’s *real*, even if it’s *uncomfortable* or *unpolished*.  **Landmark** constantly ties [***authenticity***](#authenticity) to “[***integrity***](#integrity)”—having your *words*, *actions*, and *inner states* **align**. When you spot the “***Act***,” the practice is to "*step into* [***integrity***](#integrity)" by speaking candidly or taking actions that reflect [***what’s really so***](#whats-so). </small> <br />
<a id="aliveness"></a>
• <u><b><i>Advanced Course</i></b></u>. <small> The next immediate course after The **Landmark Forum*** (which now appears to have become a selection of courses you can choose from when I last looked).  When I attended The **Landmark Forum**, the next course was *fixed* as you needed to complete the Advanced Course as part of what Landmark called the "[***Curriculum for Living***](#curriculum)."  **I never attended any Landmark courses beyond the original 3-day *Landmark Forum*** </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Aliveness</u></b></i>. <small> A sense of being ***fully aware***, fully *present* and fully *yourself*.  It is a [**state of** ***being***](#being) that Landmark Forum wants to help you to create for yourself. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Already always listening.</u></b></i>&trade; <small> Undistinguished *pre-existing interpretations* that shape, color, and influence the way people *experience* their relationships with other people, circumstances, and *even themselves*. It is listening to others with preconceived notions of what they really mean.  AAL is that "little voice in your head" that is finishing other peoples' sentences (the voice of your imagination), complete with *baked-in* and *on-the-fly* [***interpretations***](#meaning-machine) and [***stories****](#story) that you're constantly *creating* (even unconciously). Only by *recognizing* whenever you're *doing this*, and *changing your* [***Listening***](#listening), can you break out of the ***Already Always Listening*** and [***Story***](#story) cycles.  AAL one of THE ***major concepts*** in *Landmark*, and learning to manage it is a major goal of The **Landmark Forum**. </small> <br />
<a id="at-cause"></a>
<a id="at-choice"></a>
<a id="at-effect"></a>
<a id="authenticity"></a>
• <u><b><i>At Cause</u></b></i> (also expressed as "***BE Cause***"). <small> Taking responsibility for ***how you experience*** **and** ***respond*** **to events**, believing you can generate new [***possibilities***](#possibility) *rather than* being *limited* by old [*stories*](#stories) or external constraints.  “***At Cause***” is the stance of recognizing *your agency* and power to interpret, respond, and create new [***possibilities***](#possibility) in the face of virtually *any circumstance*. “**Cause**” = You *create* your *experience*. Landmark wants you to work to always *be* ***At Cause*** -- also expressed as "***BE Cause***" (fully being the "***Cause in the matter***" of your life). *See also* [***At Effect***](#at-effect). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>At Choice</u></b></i>. <small>  In **Landmark** terminology, “***at choice***” broadly means you are consciously *choosing* your actions or perspectives rather than feeling forced, compelled, or constrained by circumstances. To be ***at choice*** means you fully "[***get***](#get-it)" the [***distinction***](#distinction) between [***Choosing vs. Deciding***](#choose-decide), and can [***be***](#being) in the [***stance***](#stand) of recognizing that you can *choose* your *perspective* or *actions*. When you are ***at choice***, you are able to be ***at cause*** and *uneffected* by circumstances. And when you are in the mode of “***choosing***,” you are effectively “***at choice***.”  *See* ***At Cause*** prior to this term, and ***At Effect*** in the following term. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>At Effect</u></b></i>.<small> Feeling that you are *at the mercy of* (or “*victimized by*”) external events, other people’s decisions, or your own past [***stories***](#story) and beliefs. Another usage may be "***at the effect of*** *some circumstance*": to be a *victim of circumstances* (or even *dependent upon an ongoing circumstance* for success). “***At Effect***” is the stance of seeing life as *happening to you* where your thoughts, feelings, and outcomes are determined by *external forces*. “**Effect**”= You are *responding* automatically to *external* triggers (or *forces*). *See also* [***At Cause***](#at-cause). </small> <br />
<a id="being"></a>
• <u><b><i>Authenticity</u></b></i>. <small> (also expressed as "***Authentic***" or "***Inauthentic***").  In the **Landmark Forum’s** context, “***Authenticity***” refers to a **way of** [***being***](#being) in which you are fully aligned with [***what is so***](#whats-so)—in other words, telling the truth about your current experience (thoughts, feelings, and circumstances) without hiding, pretending, or being driven by concerns about “*looking good*” or “*being right*.”  One is being ***authentic*** when one is being *consistent* with how they portray themselves to be, with others and *themselves*. People who are ***authentic*** are *more direct*, and offer absolute candor, in their internal dialogue and also expressing themselves with others.</small> <br />
<a id="blind-spot"></a>
• <u><b><i>Being</u></b></i> <small> (often expressed as a "***way of being***"). In **Landmark** the phrase “***way of being***” (or simply “***being***”) describes the overall [***stance***](#stand) or *presence* a person brings to any situation. It’s not just a *single* behavior or attitude, but rather a combination of: </small> <br />
    • <small> **Mindset and Emotions**: The beliefs, assumptions, or emotional tone you hold. </small> <br />
    • <small> **Body Language and Tone**: How you carry yourself physically, speak, and gesture. </small> <br />
    • <small> **Underlying Commitments**: The intentions or priorities (often unspoken) that shape how you engage with others and respond to events. </small> <br />
 <small> Rather than focusing solely on *behaviors*, **Landmark** asserts that [***how you show up***](#shows-up)—your manner of “[***being***](#being)”—underlies the *results you get*. In **The Forum**, participants discover that much of their “[***way of being***](#being)” is *automatic* and shaped by ***past experiences***. People operate as if they have ***no choice*** about how they are ***being***, [***acting***](#act), or [***showing-up***](#show-up) in certain given situations. And [***Transformation***](#transformation) *arises* when you [***distinguish***](#distinguish) (or “notice”) those *default ways* of [***being***](#being)—and realize you can ***choose new ways*** that serve your commitments or [***possibilities***](#possibilities).  Landmark activities (exercises and coaching) aim to help you *consciously* “*create*” a [***way of being***](#being)—e.g., ***being*** **bold**, ***being*** **generous**, ***being*** **unstoppable**—*instead of defaulting* to ***what’s comfortable*** or **habitual**. </small> <br />
 <a id="breakdown"></a>
<a id="breakthrough"></a>
 <small> A key aspect of shifting one’s way of ***being*** is to do so [***authentically***](#authenticity) (in alignment with your truth) and with [***integrity***](#integrity) (aligned with your word).</small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Blind Spot</u></b></i>. <small> In **Landmark** "***blind spots***” highlight the idea that much of what shapes our behavior, attitudes, and outcomes lies *outside* our conscious awareness. A “***blind spot***” can be something you don’t see about yourself or your situation—even though it may be obvious to others or strongly influences your actions.  By bringing these “***unknown unknowns***” (“***blind spots***”) into the light, we can gain new freedom to choose responses and generate [***possibilities***](#possibility) that previously *weren’t visible*. </small> <br />
<small> ***Blind spots*** often form from past experiences, cultural conditioning, or childhood coping strategies that go unquestioned. Because you don’t *see* a ***blind spot***, you can’t address or shift it. This can lead to recurring [***breakdowns***](#breakdown) or frustrating outcomes you can’t explain or fix.</small> <br />
<small> The key is to *see* a ***blind spot*** without making yourself “*wrong*.” It’s about empowerment, not self-blame. Recognizing a ***blind spot*** is an opportunity to choose a new interpretation or behavior.  *See also* "[***You Don't Know, What You Don't Know***](#ydk-wydk)".  </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Breakdown</u></b></i>. <small> A ***breakdown*** happens when some [***possibility***](#possibility), *intention* or *commitment* is frustrated, stopped or thwarted.  When things don't go as expected or *intended*, or when you don't do as you said you would -- "not keeping your word" (also known as *a loss of* [***integrity***](#integrity)), a ***breakdown*** has occured.  In *Landmark* ***Breakdowns*** are viewed as *opportunities* to apply what you learned to re-commit, *get* [***complete***](#complete), and restore [***integrity***](#integrity). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Breakthrough</u></b></i>. <small> Freeing yourself from some limitation that allows you to achieve immediate and permanent leaps in performance and *quality of life*. Breakthroughs lead to abandoning old habits, and embracing a new way of being; looking at things from a different perspective, getting a new understanding of life. Sometimes described as when "the light bulb clicks on in your head" and you "[*get it*](#get-it)". Breakthroughs are one of the first results building towards [***Transformation***](#transformation). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Cause</u></b></i>. <small> *See* [***At Cause***](#at-cause)</small> <br />
<a id="choose-decide"></a>
• <u><b><i>Change</u></b></i>. <small> (*versus* [***Transformation***](#transformation)). ***Change*** begins with a something that is ***made different*** *in distance* (from *here* to *there*), or *in time* (from *now* to *then*) or *in form* (for example, from a *square* to a *circle*). An aspect of the nature of ***change*** is that **change causes the persistence** ***of the something being changed***. ***Change*** is a *gradual*, *continual shift*. [***Transformation***](#transformation), on the other hand, is a *discrete jump*: a caterpillar ***transforms*** into a moth or butterfly, but the *metamorphosis* that happens *in the cocoon* is ***change***. Improvement and evolution are **in the world of** ***change***. [***Transformation***](#transformation), *unlike* ***Change***, is about something entirely ***new*** and ***different***: a ***creation***. So **Change = a+1** , **Transformation = before was A, now is B**. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Choosing vs. Deciding</u></b></i>. <small> In *Landmark* ***Choosing vs. Deciding*** is a [***distinction***](#distinction) that highlights **two** *fundamentally different* ways of approaching an *action* or *commitment*. While both involve selecting one option *over another*, “***deciding***” is framed as a *response* to constraints and worries, whereas “choosing” is a generative act of *creation* that stems from [***freedom***](#freedom) and ownership. </small> <br />
<a id="clearing"></a>
<small> In *language*, "***Deciding***" is a *somewhat destructive* word, *related* to ***other*** "&ast;cide" words like "sui**cide**", "insecti**cide**", "geno**cide**", and many others. "&ast;cide" words like ***Decide*** are the result of [***applying reason***](#reason) to ***eliminate alternatives***: effectively **killing** ***other options*** or [***possibilities***](#possibility) until a *single thing* is left...and that becomes ***the decision***. ***Choosing***, on the other hand, is about **making a** ***choice*** purely for the sake of ***choosing***, ***not*** [***applying reason***](#reason), ***not*** applying logic, and ***not*** removing or disqualifying (**killing**) the other choices. </small> <br />
 <small> ***Choices*** don't *run out* in life, only your ***decisions*** make you *run out of* ***choices***.  At the bottom of *every* ***decision*** is either fundamental **choice** ***or*** fundamental **reason**: "*I choose to believe* ..." or "*I choose to trust* ..." --adding "... ***because***" makes it a [***reason***](#reason). By using [***reason***](#reason) (***decision***), you *absolve yourself* from [***responsibility***](#responsibility) *for* the ***choice***: it becomes the *fault of the* [***reason***](#reason) or the ***reasoning*** *process* if it fails. ***Choice***, though, *demands* [***responsibility***](#responsibility) for *making the* ***choice***. **Landmark’s** core message is about being [***at cause***](#at-cause) in life, rather than being [***at effect***](#at-effect) of circumstances. *See also* [***At Choice***](#at-choice) and [***At Effect***](#at-effect). </small> <br />
 <a id="complete"></a>
<a id="cost"></a>
<a id="context"></a>
• <u><b><i>Clearing</u></b></i>. <small> A "*space*" created in your head for something to exist, positive or negative (thoughts or interpretations, etc). The most common analogy is of a field, and removing the stones and stumps and whatever obstacles are there in the field, that interfere with the functioning of the field: whether to grow something, or to play a game, or something else. The abstraction in this case is a mental construct in which [***possibilities***](#possibility) can be placed, or *created*. The ***clearing*** is like a vacuum, and can draw things towards it. If the thing in the ***clearing*** is "*I'm no good*" then it draws things that *supports that attitude*. You are then a ***clearing*** for "I'm no good". If you want the [***possibility***](#possibility) of contribution to the world to be in your ***clearing***, to draw those flavors of [***possibilities***](#possibility)s and opportunities, then you would need to *remove* the "*I'm no good*" thing from your ***clearing***. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Complete</u></b></i>. <small> When one is ***complete*** with any aspect of their *past*, and therefore the past has ***no constraint*** on who one is *being* or how they are acting *in the* ***present***. In communication, *being complete* is one left with no *lingering resentments*, *regrets* or "*unfinished business*". </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Context</u></b></i>. <small>Context is your [***occurring***](#occur) *world*; the total of how the world around you, and *the people* and *things* in it (either in totality, or in a *given situation*), and how they [***show up***](#show-up) for you. Nearly all ***context*** in which humans live is *created*. As a "[***meaning-making machine***](#meaning-machine)", it forms the setting and the background of your [***story***](#story) and you tend to take actions based upon it in response. And you take it for granted and don't even realize: the one thing about your [***occurring***](#occur) *world*—is that you miss that "[*reality*](#reality)" unfolding for you ***is***...***context***. For example, for a fish, water is a major part of his ***context***. A fish has no *appreciation* of water, it's just *there*: his life consists of dealing with it all the time, he 'swims in it'—but no *other* fish has ever been out of water for any length of time, to come back to tell him that "*out of water*" exists...or what it's *like*.  So the fish *doesn't know* anything but water, and so *nothing else* is *possible* to him. </small> <br />
<small> Of course in this analogy the *fish's* ***context*** of "water" is that it's also a life-giving environment for him: but *humans* tend to fully inhabit (or "swim in") various ***contexts*** that aren't altogether beneficial to them, and aren't even aware of it. By contrast, looking at a situation from a view of [***responsibility***](#responsibility) is an **empowering** ***context***. And so **The Landmark Forum** tries to give you access to seeing the *created* ***context*** you may be operating *in*—or *from*. </small> <br /> 
• <u><b><i>Cost</u></b></i>.<small>(as used in [***Rackets***](#racket)&trade;). The impact of one’s reactive ways of [***being***](#being) and [***acting***](#act). The *costs* of [***Rackets***](#racket)&trade; are *love/affinity*, *vitality/well-being*, *self-expression*, and *satisfaction/fulfillment*, all of which fall under [***Aliveness***](#aliveness). *See also* [***Payoff***](#payoff) </small> <br />
<a id="curriculum"></a>
<small> When your life *sucks*, when you're in a *negative* or *disempowering* ***context***; the way to break out of it (to overcome the *negative* or *disempowering* ***context***) is to [***distinguish***](#distinguish) something. Then you can see your *disempowering story* ***as*** a [***story***](#story), and take new action in alignment with [***reality***](#reality); or take on one or more new [***ways of being***](#being) that might work better for you. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Curriculum for Living</u></b></i>.&trade; <small> The Landmark curriculum, which includes the original 3-Day **Landmark Forum** &reg;, The **Advanced Course** &reg;, The **Self Expression and Leadership Program**, and The **Landmark Forum In Action Series**. </small> <br />
<a id="distinction"></a>
<a id="distinguish"></a>
<a id="dominate"></a>
• <u><b><i>Disappear</u></b></i>. <small> To "*disappear something*" is to eliminate it, or experience it *disappearing*, such as to ***disappear*** a **Complaint**. *See also* [***Racket***](#racket).</small> <br/>
• <u><b><i>Distinction</u></b></i>. <small> A *distinction* is a linguistic phenomenon that brings something *into being* as a presence, for which previously there was no presence. *Distinction* also comes from sublanguages created to facilitate an area of thought or information -- the example of physics I used above. A *distinction* is simply a ***term***, a *word* used to name something to ***facilitate the abstraction***, for the *discussion* and/or *use* of that thing. Being able to make distinctions is about the most critical aspect to getting anything out of **The Landmark Forum**.</small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Distinguish</u></b></i>. <small> Similar to ***Distinction*** above.  Also: to take something from an undifferentiated background and bring it to the foreground. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Dominate/Avoid Domination Axis</u></b></i>. <small> Human beings often unconciously find themselves either trying to ***dominate a situation*** **or avoid** ***being dominated*** or overpowered. This age-old natural *dynamic* can shape how we *communicate*, make *decisions*, and *relate to others*. **Landmark** sometimes refers to this as operating on a “***dominate or avoid domination***” axis, and it's closely tied to "[***the need to be right***](#being-right)".  **Landmark** suggests that many of our *actions* (and *reactions*) stem from a largely *unconscious* need to ensure we’re in control (***dominance***) or *not* under *someone else’s* control (***avoidance of domination***). This is seen as a primary driver in interactions, from workplace conversations to personal relationships. This dynamic is where "[***Rackets***](#racket)" come from, and the overall “***dominate / avoid domination***” pattern keeps people stuck in defensive / reactive cycles. Becoming aware of it frees up mental and emotional energy for more creative or authentic action. </small> <br />
<small> When we want to “win” an argument, grab attention, or prove someone wrong, we’re often in *dominate* mode. When we’re trying to remain unnoticed or dismiss ourselves from the conflict, we may be in *avoid-dominance* mode. **Landmark’s** position is that these strategies limit our possibilities for real connection, clear communication, and collaborative problem-solving, because we’re locked into reactive stances based on fear or ego. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Effect</u></b></i>. <small> *See* [***At effect***](#at-effect). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Empty</u></b></i>. <small> Not *real*, *made up*, no substance. Generally used in conjunction with "meaningless" as in "**empty and meaningless**" and used in the "***Emtpy And Meaningless***" exercise.  "***Empty***" can also be used when *creating a space for* something ([***clearing***](#clearing)). *See* "[***Meaningless***](#meaningless)". </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Enrollment</u></b></i>. <small> A kind of sharing that causes a new possibility to be present for *another person*, such that they are touched, moved, or inspired by that new possibility. This term has nothing to do with signing-up for *The Forum*, which is [***Registration***](#registration). </small> <br />
<a id="freedom"></a>
<a id="leader"></a>
<a id="get-it"></a>
• <u><b><i>The Landmark Forum</u></b></i>. <small> **An accelerated learning experience, set up as a guided dialog between the instructor and participants designed to bring about a** [***transformational shift**](#transformation) ***in the participants***. Effectiveness and quality-of-life can become altered, even [***Transformed***](#transformation), in 3 days (plus an evening). A **Forum** is usually a larger group (sometimes 100+ people), and the [***Forum Leader***](#leader) reads the overall energy of the room, tracks where different conversations are going, and strategically orchestrates *the flow* so participants stay engaged and supported in their [***breakthroughs***](#breakthrough). </small> <br /> 
<small> The first course that leads to the "[***Advanced Courses***](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com/advanced-programs/the-landmark-advanced-course) (part of the [***Curriculum for Living***](#curriculum) but there are several you can choose from, now). **The Landmark Forum** &reg; is the *entry point* for all **Landmark** programs and [***Advanced Courses***](#advanced). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Forum Leader</u></b></i>. <small> The primary facilitator who guides participants through The **Landmark Forum** 3-Day (plus an evening) course. More than a typical “presenter,” the ***Leader’s*** role combines aspects of a teacher, coach, facilitator, and *catalyst* for each participant’s personal discovery. Forum Leaders undergo rigorous selection and training within Landmark, often years of leadership development, feedback, and coaching before they’re qualified to lead a **Forum** on their own. They’re steeped not just in **Landmark’s** curriculum and [***distinctions***](#distinction), but also in how to manage group dynamics, encourage [***breakthroughs***](#breakthrough), and handle sensitive conversations responsibly. </small> <br />
<small> The Forum Leader knows the material *inside and out*—every exercise, “[***distinction***](#distinction),” and the underlying theory behind each. This helps them adapt to participant questions or scenarios on-the-fly. It’s the ***Leader’s*** job to establish a space where participants can be open and introspective. At the same time, they challenge participants—*calling out* [***inauthentic***](#authenticity) or guarded communication—so people can have genuine [***breakthroughs***](#breakthrough). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Freedom</u></b></i>. <small> A [***State of Being***](#being). ***Freedom*** comes from being *at ease*. ***Freedom*** comes from being *effective*. ***Experiencing Freedom*** comes from being generative (e.g. having conversations that are [***possibility-based***](#possibility)). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Get it</u></b></i> or <u><b><i>Getting it</u></b></i>. <small> When you “***get it***,” you have a moment of genuine *insight* or *clarity* about a **Landmark** [***distinction***](#distinction), *exercise*, or *concept*. It’s not just *intellectual understanding*; rather, you see something or experience dialoge in a way that *changes* your perspective or shakes up your assumptions. **Example**: you might be wrestling with the notion of “[***responsibility***](#responsibility)” in *Landmark’s* sense (i.e., *distinct* from ***blame*** or ***fault***). You would have heard it explained multiple times, but at some point, the concept “***clicks***”—you actually grasp the power of [**holding yourself as** ***the source of your experience***](#at-cause). That’s when you might say to the Forum Leader or facilitator: “**I** ***got it***.” </small> <br />
 <small> In the context of **Landmark**, “***to get it***” and “[***to pop***](#pop)” both point to different *shifts*: “***getting it***” emphasizes the *cognitive clarity* or understanding of a key [***distinction***](#distinction), while “[***popping***](#pop)” zeroes in on the emotional/experiential [***breakthrough experience***](#breakthrough)—a moment of sudden [***freedom***](#freedom) or [***new possibility***](#possibility) that often feels palpable in the room.  So *each term* highlights a *slightly different aspect* of experiencing *sudden insight* or *release*. Together, the experiencing *both* of these things are required to achieve [***Transformation***](#transformation). “***Getting it***” often precedes a *behavioral shift* or a deep internal shift. Once you truly “***get***” a **Landmark** principle, you’re more likely to *live it*, not just talk about it. </small> <br />
 <small> My only issue with the term—if used between **Landmark** Grads, internal volunteers, or staff has always been that people can be dismissed as not "***getting-it***".  So these key [***distinctions***](#distinction) can be misused.  Generally if an internal Landmark volunteer or staffer is making waves, they're either out of [***integrity***](#integrity) or they don't "***get-it***"—a dismissive way to mollify valid criticism from within. On the attendee side, if a person doesn't "*get-it*" they may be needing more *time* to process and consider when locking-in key [***distinctions***](#distinction), to increase their chance to "[***Pop***](#pop)" as they call it.</small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Graduate</u></b></i>. <small> A person who has completed **The Landmark Forum**. </small> <br />
<a id="integrity"></a>
• <u><b><i>I</u></b></i>. <small> What people tend to think of, in its capacity as an [***Identity***](#identity), as being a collection of characteristics, attributes, and experiences from the past. **Landmark** tries to (at least *temporarily*) get you to see and understand ***I***, **not** as ***a concept of self*** but instead **just simply a pattern of neurons** ***firing****.  This allows you, at least temporarily, work to view Events, Moments, and Interpretations differently. *See also* [***Identity***](#identity) in the following term. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Identity</u></b></i>. <small> A [***Story***](#story) that we invented about ourselves. The process of inventing an ***Identity*** begins in childhood, as we gradually adopted [***ways of Being***](#being) and [***Acting***](#act) to deal successfully with things that didn't quite go the way we thought they should.</small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Informative Learning</u></b></i>. <small> *Learning* that increases what people *know* and adds to their skills by bringing new knowledge to an *existing worldview* and **frame of reference**. Compare to [***Transformative learning***](#transformation). </small> <br />
<a id="life"></a>
<a id="listening"></a>
• <u><b><i>Integrity</u></b></i>. <small> This **Landmark** term throws outsiders, since the *common understanding* is about a "*quality of being honest and having strong moral principles*"—*not* in **Landmark**: in **The Forum** ***Integrity*** is a *state* or condition of *being whole*, [***complete***](#complete) and *unimpaired*. For a person, ***integrity*** is a matter of a person’s word. The extent to which *who you are* reflects the person you *intend to be*.  It is presented, though, from a perspective of *workability*. The *more workable*, the *more* ***integrity***, the *less workable*, there is a *loss of* ***integrity***. *Keeping* one's word is associated with ***integrity*** -- agreeing with common usage -- *but in* **Landmark**, it is a progression. ***Not*** keeping your word (aka not "***being your word***") means you were [***inauthentic***](#authenticity) about your word. [***Inauthenticity***](#authenticity) leads to unreliability, which reduces [***workability***](#workability), and thus a *loss* of ***integrity***. **Example**: If you say you will be at a business meeting at 5pm and show up at 5:10pm, there is some [***inauthenticity***](#authenticity) there, and a loss of 10 minutes of time, reducing the [***workability***](#workability) *of* the meeting, which may have to still end on time.  So there is *less time* for discussion, information sharing, etc which can lead to [***incompleteness***](#complete)—which *also reduces* [***workability***](#workability). Thus a *lack of* ***integrity***, a loss of ***integrity***, or simply being "*out of* ***integrity***" (meaning: you are outside of a state of ***integrity***).  People who are continually aligned with their word are "*in* ***integrity***" and often described as "***walking the talk***, or being "*in* ***integrity***". </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Life</u></b></i>. <small> *As in* "*yourself and your life*." Our entire set of *relationships with people*. </small><br />
<a id="meaningless"></a>
<a id="meaning-machine"></a>
• <u><b><i>Listening</u></b></i>. <small>  In Landmark Education, "*Listening*" does include the action of actually listening to another person in the common sense, but also includes **a state of** ***being***. In this regard, the qualifying statements are similar to "... in your listening". This state of being is recognized as providing a coloration to your listening to what others are saying, and to what is happening around you, even if no sound is hitting your ears. It is the application of interpretation, and the recognition that we are always applying some sort of interpretation to our sensory input. By recognizing that we are *applying color*, *and* the color that is *being applied*, we can then *choose* that coloration. The [***state of being***](#being) is referred to as "your [***clearing***](#clearing)", and that *clearing* provides the coloration, the interpretation, and the responses produced. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Meaningless</u></b></i>. <small> The *absence* of inherent meaning. Used in conjunction with "***empty***" as in "**empty and meaningless**", which comes up towards the end of the course during the "***Empty And Meaningless***" exercise. This sentiment comes from Ecclesiastes and other philosophical texts from several eras. ***Meaning*** **is the association of things with** ***other*** **things**. This is an action of interpretation, of creating "[***story***](#story)" anytime we are in the act of ***making-meaning***.  Since it is *made up*, it is *not real*, and therefore *empty*. People tend to use "*meaning*" to ascribe substance and *value* to something. But since the meaning is *made up* (*empty*), it is really meaningless, *without substance*, and thus subject to *change*, *alteration*, *transformation*, or *disappearance* by you.  Being able to suspend or "*remove a meaning which does not serve you*", instead of the default of being a ***Meaning-Making machine*** (see term below) is one of the popular concepts taught during the 3-Day **Landmark Forum** course. **Not to be confused with Nihilism**—Landmark clarifies that saying life is "***empty and meaningless***" does not imply a negative or pessimistic stance.  Rather, it underscores that *meaning* is something that we *add* (see next term "***Meaning-Making Machines***").  In practice, participants have reported feeling liberated by this concept, not despairing. </small> <br />
<a id="occur"></a>
• <u><b><i>Meaning-Making Machines</u></b></i>. <small> The **Landmark Forum** establishes that "*humans are* ***meaning making machines***" on Day 1, which means: we assign ***meaning*** to *everything that happens to us*. ⁣***Everything***. The **problem**, **Landmark** states, is that most of the time ***meaning*** gets assigned *subconsciously*, and often we assign things a ***negative meaning***. ⁣⁣That’s just the *nature of the human mind*: we go negative (our minds are these "[if it bleeds, it *leads*"](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/if_it_bleeds,_it_leads) things, when it comes to [***Interpreting***](#story)). ⁣And because we often do this *subconciously*, we *do not* ***see*** that we're *creating-meaning* and feeding an overall [***Interpretation***](#what-happened) or [***Story***](#story)", of an external event or moment. And, again, because we do *all* of this *subconciously* and automatically our "[***stories***](#story)" are often taken as ***fact*** --- *not* the [***Interpretations***](#what-happened) that they *actually are* in [***reality***](#reality).  [***Getting this concept***](#get-it) early is an important core foundation for understanding concepts later on like [***Rackets***](#racket) and how they can rob us of [***Aliveness***](#aliveness). *See also* [***Story***](#story) and [***What Happened***](#what-happened) terms.</small><br />
<a id="ontology"></a>
<a id="payoff"></a>
<a id="pop"></a>
• <u><b><i>Occur</u></b></i> <small> (often used in the *plural* form, as in "***how it occurs*** ...").  An active form "occurring" and in the past tense "how it occurred ..." both allude to the [***interpretation***](#story) of something. Occurring applies [***story***](#story) and [***reason***](#reason) to *create your view* of [***what happened***](#what-happened), or to ***how you think*** about something (often *independent* of facts or [***what's so***](#whats-so)). ***Occuring*** is **Landmark** shorthand for “*the way I see, perceive, or interpret this situation*.”, and ***occurring*** is a subconscious summarization *and* associative process that hits the conscious mind as [***real***](#reality) or as ***truth*** (again, often *independent* of facts or [***what's so***](#whats-so)). </small> <br />
 <small> It is really difficult to grasp ***occurs*** / ***occurring*** without training or practice.  It's hard to understand it just by reading this concept in a book, or *this Glossary*. **Example**: someone yelling at you could ***occur*** as them being *angry* from far away (if you don't hear everything they're saying, and only looking at their face); or you first are thinking that ***they think*** you are *deaf* or "*stupid*"; when in actual (objective) [***reality***](#reality) the person may have just been trying to urgently get your attention to an oncoming car, or other danger or emergency. To stop and briefly note to yourself "*how something is* ***occuring***" can help you suspend our "[***meaning-making***](#meaning-machine)" nature so that we might avoid creating an unhelpful [***story***](#story) about [***what happened***](#what-happened) inaccurately. </small> <br />
<small> Learning to *see* how things ***occur*** *for you* is a big first-step towards trying to describe [***what happened***](#what-happened) or understand [***what's so***](#whats-so), otherwise the alternative is to automatically be *beholden* to your ***interpretations*** unknowingly-and not able to evaluate ***how something occurred*** for you. When you are noticing how something “***occurs***” to you—you can reframe that view and open new avenues for action or collaboration. </small> <br />
 <small> **Landmark** underscores that what “***occurs***” (internally) and what “***shows up***” (externally) are both [***distinctions***](#distinction) you can notice, and choose to alter. One *exercise* that **Landmark** teaches is to actually *use* the word "***occurs***" in a phrase-"***it occurs to me***"-to create a space for a positive (healthy) confrontation (not *argument*, opportunity to get clear communication) to avoid misunderstandings and "[***Speak into the Listening***](#speak-listening)".  The phrase "***it occurs to me that...***" is an opening to create [***possibility***](#possibility) for [***Authenticity***](#authenticity) and [***Racket-free***](#racket) communication in relationships with friends, co-workers, or even family members. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Ontology</u></b></i> <small> (and/or ***Ontological***).  A set of *concepts* and *categories* in a subject area or *domain* that shows their properties and the *relations between them*. Ontology deals with the **nature of** [***Being***](#being). Landmark's emphasis on *language* and it's ***Ontology*** is predicated upon the notion that humans ***think in language***, and that mastering one's *internal language* is one key to living powerfully. <br />
***Ontology*** in the *philosophical sense* is a theoretical discipline, considered by some Philosphers to be (roughly) a possible science of [***what is***](#what-is), of the kinds and structures of objects, properties, events, processes and relations in every area of [***reality***](#reality). </small><br />
<a id="possibility"></a>
• <u><b><i>Payoff</u></b></i>. <small> A ***payoff*** is something one *gets* out of certain ways of [***Being***](#being) and [***acting***](#act) that is not immediately obvious. [***Rackets***](#racket), for example, are all about ***payoffs***; however, [***Rackets***](#racket) also exact many hidden [***Costs****](#cost). </small> <br />
 <small> The ***payoff*** can be *a*ddictive*, because it reaffirms your self-image and [***your story***](#story) about the situation. ***Payoffs*** usually satisfy an immediate emotional or ego need (to *win*, to be *validated*), but they don’t necessarily foster real connection or growth-and they often come at [***a Cost***](#cost). </small> <br />
 <small> **Landmark’s** goal is to help participants see these dynamics (and the ***payoffs***/[***costs***](#cost) they yield) so they can choose new ways of interacting—ways that aren’t *locked into* [***being right***](#being-right*) or [***avoiding being wrong***](#dominate). By breaking free of the [***dominate/avoid domination***](#dominate) cycle and acknowledging that [***the need to be right***](#being-right) is *just one expression* of that, you open space for [***authentic***](#authenticity) communication, mutual respect, and real collaboration. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Pop</u></b></i>. <small> There are no statistics on this, but it's generally understood that everyone who completes The **Landmark Forum** gets [***transformation***](#transformation) on at least some matters. The *experience of it* is distinct from one person to the next. Some people experience a *more powerful transformation* in the [***Advanced Courses***](#advanced) than from the original **Landmark Forum**. But **Landmark** says the bottom-line is that if you participate in the program, and take what you get, you will ***Pop*** -- meaning: you'll "[***get***](#get-it)" a **Landmark** principle or concept, such that you will ***pop*** and experience [*transformation*](#transformation). </small> <br />
 <small> A “***pop***” can be catalytic. Once you’ve had that emotional or embodied [***breakthrough***](#breakthrough), your communication, relationships, or sense of [***what’s possible***](#possibility) tend to change markedly—and often *quite quickly*.
When attendees ***pop*** or otherwise "[***get***](#get-it)", it manifests via *physical* and *emotional* indicators: People sometimes describe a wave of relief, laughter, or even tears when they “***pop***.” </small> <br />
<small> An anology often used by the **Forum Leader** is: "*when making popcorn, the kernels cooking will all* "***pop*** *at different times.  So if you stay with it, and honestly take what you get, you** ***will pop*** *at some point during the course*." </small> <br /> 
 <small> There is some overlap between when you "***get it***" and when you "***pop***". *When you* “***get it***” you usually have made a big [***distinction***](#distinction)] that leads to a new *inside* (setting the stage for a [***breakthrough***](#breakthrough)), and *when you* “[***pop***](#pop)” your [***breakthrough***](#breakthrough) leads you to experience a *release* and sudden shift which can lead quickly to [***transformation***](#transformation). Graduates and participants often use “***get it***” and “***pop***” in conversation to describe specific turning points during the Forum or other Landmark courses. The language helps them *name* those [***breakthrough***](#breakthrough) moments. </small><br />
<a id="racket"></a>
<a id="reality"></a>
• <u><b><i>Possibility</u></b></i>. <small> A phenomenon in language that creates a new future *right now*. *Possibility* leaves us with ***Power*** and [***Freedom***](#freedom). </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Power</u></b></i>. <small> The rate at which an *intention* is turned into a *result*. Power comes from [***possibility***](#possibility) and from being [***authentic***](#authenticity). </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Racket</u></b></i>.&trade; <small> A ***Racket*** is a *persistent* ***complaint*** combined with a *fixed* way of [***Being***](#being). ***Rackets*** are maintained because of [***Payoffs***](#payoff), and they persist until *dropping the* ***Racket*** (and thus its associated [***cost***](#cost)) is chosen. This complaint pattern can give you an ongoing sense of righteousness or victimhood—both of which feed [***the need to be right***](#being-right).  <br />
By *giving up* the [***need to be right***](#being-right), you a can own *and drop* [***your Rackets***](#racket) and live [***Authentically***](#authenticity) and foster relationships built on honesty and mutual respect, rather than hidden agendas. **Landmark** says that ***Rackets*** (and their [***costs***](#cost))rob us of [***Aliveness***](#aliveness). *See also* [***Payoff***](#payoff) and [***Cost****](#cost) terms. </small><br />
<a id="reason"></a>
<a id="registration"></a>
• <u><b><i>Reality</u></b></i>. <small> That which is ***real*** either ***independently of language*** (e.g., "***a car***"), and that which is ***real*** *only* ***in*** *language* (e.g., ***a concept***).  A proper understanding of how ***reality exists as a concept*** is *critical* to understanding the concepts covered in the ["***What Happened***"](#what-happened) terminology and exercises. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Reason</u></b></i>. <small> An excuse we invent to justify *choices* we make. That would be Ambrose Bierce's definition. When choices are made according to "reasons," they are distinguished as the "machine" operating, based on assumptions about truth and reality. Genuine choice operates on another level. Reasoning is not denied, but distinguished as rooted in our [***stories***](#story) about reality. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs. *See also* [***Choosing vs Deciding***](#choose-decide) and ***Reasonable***. </small><br />
<a id="responsibility"></a>
• <u><b><i>Reasonable</u></b></i>. <small> To justify *acting*, or ***not*** *acting*, based on ***reasons*** and ***justifications***.  *See also* [***Choosing vs. Deciding***](#choose-decide). The **Forum** wants you see that there is [***possibility***](#possibility), **power**, and **self-expression** available to us by being  The ability to *choose* when you want to be ***reaonable*** *or* ***unreasonable*** is one of the main key life-altering [*breakthroughs*](#breakthrough) that The Landmark Forum wants to impart to its Graduates. </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Registration</u></b></i>. <small> *See also* ***Enrollment***. Some action that registers a commitment to the future, for example registering for a gym membership.  </small><br />
<a id="shows-up"></a>
• <u><b><i>Resentment</u></b></i>. <small> A poison people swallow hoping it will kill the other person. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term, specificially. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in **Landmark** programs. [***Rackets***](#racket) are often driven by ***resentment*** cand create unseen [***costs***](#cost). </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Responsibility</u></b></i>. <small> This is a key area of the **Landmark Forum** that people can struggle with, and is one of the most difficult to explain to anyone who *hasn't attended* **The Forum**, so I will let founder [**Werner Erhard**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard) explain it: </small>

> “**Responsibility** begins with the **willingness to** ***take the*** [***stand***](#stand) **that one is** [***cause in the matter of one’s life***](#at-cause). It is a ***declaration*** ***not*** an *assertion*, that is, it (*Responsibility*)is a **[context](#context) from which one chooses to** ***live***. **Responsibility** is ***not*** *burden*, *fault*, *praise*, *blame*, *credit*, *shame* or *guilt*. In ***Responsibility***, **there is no evaluation of** ***good*** **or** ***bad***, ***right*** **or** ***wrong***. **There is simply** [***what’s so***](#whats-so), **and** ***the [stand](#stand) you choose to take*** **on** [***what’s so***](#whats-so). **Being responsible** starts with the willingness to deal with a situation ***from the view*** of life that *you* are the [*generator* of what *you* ***do***](#at-cause), what *you* ***have***. and what *you* ***are***. That is **not** "***the truth***". It is a *place to* [***stand***](#stand). No one can ***make you responsible***, nor can you ***impose responsibility*** *on another*. It is a grace you *give* ***yourself*** – an ***empowering [context](#context)*** that leaves you with a *say in the matter of life*.” <br />

-[***Werner Erhard***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard)  <br /><br />
• <u><b><i>Self-Expression and Leadership Program</u></b></i>. <small> The final courses in the original [***Curriculum for Living***](#curriculum) &reg;.  This program expands one’s natural capacity for providing leadership and making a difference as a natural ***self-expression***. </small><br />
<a id="strongsuit"></a>
<a id="stand"></a>
<a id="speak-listening"></a>
• <u><b><i>Show up</u></b></i> <small> (as in "how you ***show-up***, or "how something ***shows-up*** for you"). “How I ***show up***” or “how something ***shows up***” generally refers to how someone or something appears or presents itself in a given situation. This could include your body language, your choice of words, your energy, or how you [***act***](#act) toward others (e.g. ***showing up*** [***authentically***](#authenticity), or ***showing up*** having [***integrity***](#integrity)).  **Example**: “You consistently ***show-up*** as annoyed, which impacts how everyone interacts with you.” The emphasis is on awareness of *impact*. **Another Example**: if you’re ***showing up*** distracted or closed-off, that may affect how people interact with you. <br />
Becoming conscious of *how* you ***show up*** is a step toward [***being***](#being) at choice in how you present yourself—so you can align your way of being with your commitments or intentions. **Last Example***: if you're going with your default *interpretation* of something, how it ***shows-up*** for you (your *experience* of a situation) may be negative leaving you [***At-Effect***](#at-effect) of a *disempowering* [***story***](#story).<br />
Landmark underscores that what “***shows up***” (externally) and what “[***occurs***](#occur)” (internally) are both [***distinctions***](#distinction) you can notice, and choose to alter. By consciously *choosing* how you “***show up***,” you can positively influence relationships, teams, and outcomes. </small><br />
<a id="story"></a>
• <u><b><i>Speaking into the listening</u></b></i>. <small> Effectively communicating to another *such that* the **communication is** ***heard*** in the way in which the speaker ***intended***. </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Stand</u></b></i>  <small> (as in "*taking a* ***stand***", "a ***stance***", or "***standing*** *in your commitments*").  “***Stand***” refers to a **powerful declaration** or *commitment* you make—**both** *to yourself* and *to others*—that shapes how you [***show up***](#show-up) and ***take action*** in the world.  Unlike a mere *opinion* or *belief*, a “***stand***” is something you *choose* to [***be***](#being)...rather than something you simply *have*. It serves as a guiding principle or commitment that informs your choices and interactions, creating a powerful [***context***](#context) for [***transformation***](#transformation) and [***possibility***](#possibility). <br />
The **Landmark Forum** emphasizes that **language isn’t merely** *descriptive*—it can be ***generative***. By ***taking a stand***, you use language to generate a new [***possibility***](#possibility) or [***reality***](#reality), *not* just *talk* about it. That’s why “*I* ***stand*** *for X*” has a **different impact** than “*I’d like X to happen*.”  A ***stand*** also tests your [***integrity***](#integrity) and [***authenticity***](#authenticity)—if you *say* ***you stand for something***, your actions, words, and presence should align with it. Whenever you break from that commitment (*see* [***Breakdown***](#breakdown)), you can notice the gap and restore integrity by recommitting to your stand. <br />
A ***stand*** should ***not*** ever be confused with a **goal** or **wish**: a *goal* might have a deadline or a specific **outcome**. A ***stand*** is *broader* and *more* ***fundamental***: it affects how you relate to everything, including unexpected circumstances or failures, because it’s an *expression of who* you are [***being***](#being), not just what you want to accomplish.  Also ***taking a stand*** might ***feel arbitrary*** *at first* (because you can [***choose***](#choose-decide) any ***stand*** you want), but ***once declared***, it becomes a **guiding principle** you ***own and live by***. It’s less about being “***right***” and more about ***being true*** to what you’ve publicly *committed to*. <br />
In **Landmark** (and **est** before it), ***taking a “stand”*** means *creating* and *inhabiting* a powerful [***context***](#context) or commitment that informs every aspect of your behavior.  It’s an active, generative way of [***shaping your actions***](#at-cause), *language*, and *relationships*, rather than [***passively being shaped by circumstances***](#at-effect) or beliefs. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Stinginess</u></b></i>. <small> Deliberately holding oneself, and one’s contribution, "*close to the vest*" and without generosity.  Also not being [***authentic***](#authenticity) or having [***integrity***](#integrity) are two ways in which we might [***be***](#being) or [***show-up***](#show-up) for others as ***stingy*** or *not generous*. </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Stoicism</u></b></i>. <small>Not *directly* related to The **Landmark Forum** curriculum or a term from the 3-day course; *however*, ***Stoicism*** as a philosophy informs the concepts of "[***At Cause***](#at-cause)" and "[***At Effect***](#at-effect)". </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Story</u></b></i>. <small> A "***story***" is an account or *interpretation* of past events often mistakenly taken for [**what actually** ***happened***](#what-happened). People tend to collapse their interpretations into with [***what really happened***](#what-happened)—such that you can *only see* a situation *from* your *interpretation*. Landmark says that you naturally think about the *actual* [*reality*](#reality) of something *not* "[***as it is***](#whats-so)", but as what you [***made it mean***](#meaning-machine). “*She told a story*” does not mean “*she lied*.” Rather, any account (in our internal dialogue, or when talking to another person) is subconsciously ***an interpretation***.  Yet we tend to believe *our interpretations* are ***facts*** when they aren't. If another **Landmark Forum** Leader or Graduate asks you "is that really [***what happened***](#what-happened), or is this [***your story***](#story)?", they aren't calling you out or saying you're being untruthful: they are inviting you to stop and examine if you are unconciously confusing your *interpretation* with [***what's so***](#whats-so) or **what actually** [***happened***](#what-happened). </small><br />
<a id="being-right"></a>
• <u><b><i>Strong suit</u></b></i>. <small> A way of ***being*** and ***acting*** that one relies on to produce results and make it in [***life***](#life), but keeps us from perceiving new options. ***Strong suits*** can originate from three transitional stages of one's life — *early childhood*, *adolescence*, and *adulthood*. These may have worked repeatedly in the past but they can obstruct more effective approaches. Previously called "***Formula for success***", and "***Winning formula***".  </small><br />
<a id="transformation"></a>
<a id="unreasonable"></a>
• <u><b><i>Superstition</u></b></i>. <small>The system of ideas, beliefs, social and cultural assumptions, and *taken-for-granted* conclusions (etc) through which an individual interprets and interacts with the world, other people, and himself or herself.  Living with others' *Dogma* and adhering to it, instead of living so to speak. NOTE: This is not a Landmark term. Just the generic meaning of the word is used in Landmark programs. </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>The Need to Be Right</u></b></i>. <small> Many people don’t realize that they’re operating from a stance of “*I must be in charge*” or “*I must not be overpowered*.” By labeling it as a *dynamic*, **Landmark** helps participants become aware of how pervasive it is in everyday life. For ***the need to be right*** dynamic to be in play, possible [***payoffs***](#payoff) include: *feeling superior*, *maintaining the illusion of control*, *voiding vulnerability or scrutiny*, or *getting sympathy or attention*.  When you are holding/running a [***Racket***](#racket) (persistent complain) about someone, you are "*making them wrong*". *Letting-go of* ***the need to be right*** is a powerful way to [***be***](#being) and a first-step to dropping your [***Rackets***](#racket) or breaking out of a [***Dominate-Avoid Domination***](#dominate) cycle. Even when you’re avoiding confrontation, you may still have an internal stance of “*I’m right*” or “*They’re wrong*,” which is a subtler attempt to keep from feeling dominated by others’ ideas. *Seeing* this takes practice, and *giving-up* ***the need to be right*** takes practice as well.  Doing so allows you to avoid the [***Cost***](#cost) / [***Payoff***](#payoff) cycle that comes along with ***the need to be right*** and related issues it brings.  *See also* [***Dominate / Avoid Domination***](#dominate) and [***Racket***](#racket). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Transformation</u></b></i>. <small>The invention of a new realm of ***possibility*** for yourself and your life. The invention of the realm is a necessary condition, but not sufficient for transformation. Without resultant new actions in alignment with the possibilities populating the realm, the invention is just a mental exercise. </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Transformative learning</u></b></i>. <small>Transformative learning, gives people an awareness of the basic structures in which one knows, thinks, and acts in the world. From that awareness comes a fundamental shift that leaves people more fully in accord with their own possibilities and those of others. Transformative learning is contrasted with Informational Learning. Informational learning increases knowledge and ability. Transformative learning results in new perspectives and new abilities (and sometimes disabilities). The common example is of learning to ride a bicycle. Very little information is provided, like "pedal". Suddenly the learner gets balance and is able to ride the bike without help. They have discovered it for themselves, and may never loose the ability to ride a bike. The experience, the learning, transforms the person, their perspective and their abilities. Before they couldn't, now they can. And, a whole new world or realm of possibilities is opened up. </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Unreasonable</u></b></i>. <small> *Not* to be mistaken for *irrational* or wrecklesss. To [***be***](#being) ***unreasonable*** is to *go beyond* one’s [***reasons***](#reason), *justifications* or lengthy *considerations* to *act on* something one is committed to. *See also* [***Choosing vs. Deciding***](#choose-decide) and [***reasonable***](#reason). </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>Unreasonable Request</u></b></i>. <small> A request that requires one to go *beyond* one’s reasons, justifications and considerations to act on something one is committed to. </small><br />
<a id="what-happened"></a>
• <u><b><i>Vicious circle</u></b></i> &trade;. <small> The human tendency to collapse [***what happened***](#what-happened) with **the** ***story we tell*** **ourselves (or others)** ***ABOUT what happened***. **The story** creates a clearing, a ***listening***, for *that which supports the story* (confirmation bias, etc), resulting in *more occurrences* of *things that further support* [***the story***](#story), forming a self-supporting ***Vicious Circle***. The ***Vicious Circle*** encompases [***possibility***](#possibility)-limiting concepts that determine our experience, and shape future experiences. </small> <br />
<a id="whats-so"></a>
• <u><b><i>What Happened</u></b></i>. <small> ***Consensual*** (agreed-on) shared [***reality***](#reality), or "*objective*" [***reality***](#reality) *aside from* (not relating at all to) judgment, blame, right/wrong, good/bad, and *other forms of* "[***meaning***](#meaning-machine)." ***What happens*** [***occurs***](#occur) to us ***as it is analyzed*** our [***Already Always Listening***](#aal) to be good/bad, etc. If my ex-wife told me she had a problem with what I've done, that's ***what happened***. If I say in response that "*she was unreasonable and mean to me*", that's [***my story***](#story]) about it, **not** necessarily ***what happened***. *See also* [***Story***](#story) which is a core component of understanding this term and concept. --**NOTE**: In our current era where ["*Alternative Facts*"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_facts) inflames or distorts discussions requiring an *agreed-upon* [***reality***](#reality), successfully *working through* ***What Happened*** or ***What's so*** (for **The Forum's** purposes) is truly a challenge! </small><br />
<a id="workability"></a>
<a id="ydk-wydk"></a>
• <u><b><i>What is</u></b></i> and/or <u><b><i>What's so</u></b></i>.  <small> In **Landmark** there’s a *difference* between the *raw facts* of a situation and the [***interpretations***](#meaning-machine) or [***stories***](#story) we layer on top of those facts (*See* ***What Happened*** above).  **Landmark** uses "***What's so***" to direct attention to [***reality***](#reality) as it ***is***: *independent* of our habitual biases, judgments, or narratives.  <br />
**Landmark** emphasizes that: **while** “***what is so***” **is factual**, our ***experience*** often depends on the [***meaning***](#meaning-machine) or [***story***](#story) *we create*. By recognizing the difference, you can see where your emotions come from ([***the story***](#story)) look only at *the facts themselves*. **Landmark** suggests that if you can [***distinguish***](#distinction) the **fact** from the [***interpretation***](#story), you have the [***freedom***](#freedom) to choose a new way of responding. **Landmark Forum Leaders** conduct group exercises where facilitators ask participants to state **only** ***what’s so*** about something, *before* discussing feelings or interpretations. This exercise reveals how *quickly* we add [***personal meaning***](#story) or “*take things* ***personally***”, allowing the participants to have a [***breakthrough***](#breakthrough). </small><br />
• <u><b><i>Workability</u></b></i>. <small> “***Workability***” refers to how *effective* or *functional* something is—whether it’s a plan, a conversation, a relationship, or even an individual’s approach to [***life***](#life). The standard of ***workability*** is straightforward: **does it produce the desired outcome without unnecessary friction, conflict, or** [***breakdown***](#breakdown)? If yes, it is “***workable***.” If it leads to persistent breakdowns, frustration, and unresolved issues, it’s “***unworkable***.” <br />
Rather than judging something as morally right or wrong, **Landmark** encourages you to ask: “Is this ***working***?” or “Does this achieve what I’m committed to?” This departs from *good/bad* or *correct/incorrect* judgments, focusing on tangible *results* and *practical alignment* with one’s commitments. <br />
Something “***works***” when it aligns with “[***what’s so***](#whats-so)”—the facts on the ground—and with the agreements you’ve made. ***Workability*** often ties back to [***integrity***](#integrity) and [***authenticity***](#authenticity) in **Landmark’s** view. If your word is out of alignment with your actions, relationships often become ***unworkable***.  Landmark is all about ***workability*** and "*being your word*".  <br />
In **Landmark**, ***unworkability*** suggests you’re often “*in resistance*” to how things [***are***](#whats-so) (the facts), or you’re not in clear communication about your expectations. This and "*being your word*" and "*walking the talk*" are some of the more abstract, but also potentially *abusable*, aspects of how people working *inside* **Landmark** interact, and seems to be how they set/calibrate expectations. <br />
Rather than labeling an ***unworkable*** situation as “*bad*,” **Landmark** invites attendees to see it as an *opportunity*: "*What’s missing that, if provided, would make this ***workable***? A new agreement, a new action, or a shift in mindset?"  It is quite a positive and helpful concept, and only concern with it is how veteran atteendees—who become volunteers—end up dealing with being told they're "*out of integrity*" or making a situation ***unworkable***.  **Landmark** seems to use its entire spread of [***distinctions***](#distinction) (the "*technology*") internally, and seemingly aggressively, for their work.  </small> <br />
• <u><b><i>"You Don't Know, What You Don't Know"</u></b></i> <small> (related to [***Blind Spots***](#blind-spot)). **Landmark** suggests our worldview is limited not just by what we *do* or *don’t* **know**, but by the fact that there are *areas of knowledge* or perspectives that *we aren’t even aware* **exist**. This is distinct from “*I know I don’t know something*,” where you can seek answers; “***you don’t know what you don’t know***” implies there’s a realm of [***possibility***](#possibility) you haven’t discovered *to begin with*. A large focus in **Landmark** is on *revealing* these "***unknown unknowns***". When they become *known*, you might see new choices, new perspectives, or realize your old assumptions were self-imposed. **Example**: Until you realize you’ve been approaching your career with a victim mindset—“*They never promote me because they’re unfair*”—you may not see the role of your own minimal self-advocacy as part of the dynamic. </small> <br />
<small> “***You don’t know what you don’t know***” is a powerful tool you can use to find your [***blind spots***](#blind-spot).  If you get triggered, step back and label that as “[***what’s so***](#whats-so)” (a neutral event) vs. “my automatic interpretation.” This difference can lead you to the source of most any [***blind spot***](#blind-spot). **Example**: Discovering you have an ingrained fear of rejection can shift how you engage in job interviews or personal relationships, allowing you to approach them with more confidence and openness. *See also* [***Blind Spots***](#blind-spot). </small> <br />

Terms or phrases with "&trade;" or "&reg;" are *trademarked* or *registered* properties of [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), are openly used in their public literature, and are only referenced here for my own recollection.  All rights to these terms belong to Landmark Education and [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and no authorship or ownership is claimed in *any* way.

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: The terms and definitions on this page are my own personal work product and are ***not*** reviewed or approved by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com).


## FAQ

#### 1. This is a *LOT* of information! How could I (and how do *you*) ever keep it all straight?  How can I ever be sure I *understand* Landmark's terminology, let alone *apply* any of it, after studying resources like this? 

**A:** <br />

**The *short* answer is** ***you probably can't***.  What I *mean* is that ***I*** learned this stuff while experiencing **The Landmark Forum**: an intense 3-day (and one evening) ongoing group-based conversation that lasted 12-15 hours per day. It's just *not* material that lends itself to the *written-word* without actually *discussing* the concepts in a group setting—they're practically just *word salad* otherwise. Thus my rough informal Glossary and [Landmark posts](#preface) here were ***never*** intended for *learning* or *getting* **Landmark** concepts and distinctions. Every discipline has its own *lingo* or "*terms of art*"; however, "*knowledge through experience*" is primarily how the concepts in **The Landmark Forum** get learned. **Landmark's** teaching is [***Ontological***](#ontology), that is, our ***understanding of the nature of a thing*** ("[***being***](#Being)" etc) gets primarily formed through our immediate ***firsthand interaction*** and experience with it.  Each concept or term is taught this way, during the 3-day sessions. <br />

**To put succintly**: the *knowing* of this material ("***getting it***", as they say) probably requires *attending* The **Landmark Forum** 3-day weekend (and one Tuesday night) sessions.  The phrase "[**If you know, you** ***know***...](https://www.planoly.com/glossary/iykyk)" (IYKYK) applies to so much of this material.  I think someon who pursues a degree in **academeic Philosophy**, with emphasis on *both* Eastern and Western Philosophies, would probably get this stuff—but for my money, a weekend at The **Landmark Forum** was a lot quicker (and cheaper 🙃). **The Forum** a repackaging of a lot of major Zen and Philosophical concepts, but it gets pretty deep in a short time. So I think anyone trying to use [my 3-part write-up](#preface) or this rough Glossary, *without* having attended **The Forum**, is *folly*. Hence that is why this page's intended audience are **Forum** grads or non-biased/academic researches.

#### 2. Are you a Landmark Forum fan, enthusiast, or shill?  Otherwise what is the point of this page?

Nope. I am just some guy who got a free ride (company *sponsored*) to attend The **Landmark Forum** in 1994. The *point* of this rough Glossary is *twofold*: <br />

1. This page is a companion piece to my [3-part special write-up](#preface) on The **Landmark Forum** that I published here in 2009.  <br />
2. This page is for *my own personal reference* from notes I wrote down in between sessions, and is offered to **Landmark** Graduates-to provide a place for unbiased revisiting of **Landmark** terminology (as *I understood it*, anyway) after attending nearly 30 years ago.  <br />

So I talk about **Landmark Forum** without fear or favor, and I never "proselytize" it. That I *attended* and perhaps *got something* out it way back in 1994-is my own business.  *Personal* ***for me***, and me alone, and no part of this rough Glossary is intended to "sell" anybody on **The Forum**.  That is   My personal [**stand**](#stand) here was to have a reference of my original notes on these concepts from 30 years ago, because I find several [**discinctions**](#distinctions) useful to this day.  Nothing more. <br />

So I am ***NOT*** trying to "*get people to join*" **Landmark Worldwide**, nor am I *anti*-**Landmark**.  I *do* beleive **The Forum** *is* only useful for *certain types* of people with certain personality traits which include curiosity, and a strong sense of who they already are (and don't mind self-examination). It is certainly ***not for everyone***, and I think **Landmark Worldwide** reps and **Forum** Leaders would 100% agree with me on that.

#### 3. I have read many of these terms and concepts in other materials, or experienced them in *other* seminars and conferences that I have attended in the past. Can you share any *Philosophies* inform the Landmark Forum curriculum?

**A:** <br />

Yes! Below is a list I compiled over the years, of some of the primary philosophies (or philosophers) that I have read, which seem to be the core knowledge that informed [Werner Erhard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard) in his creation of the original [**est**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erhard_Seminars_Training) curriculums. I will include specific **Landmark** terms (in ***parenthesis***) next to each philosopher *or* philosophy that I cite: <br />

[**Abraham Maslow**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abraham_Maslow) (emphasized self-actualization and *peak experiences* / the impetus for personal transformation found in **est** correlates with the push toward self-actualization and tapping hidden human potential) <br />
[**Alan Watts**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Watts), (not strictly a philosopher, but popularized Zen and Eastern thought in the West) <br />
[**Alfred Korzybski**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Korzybski) and ***General Semantics*** ([***What Happened***](#what-happened) and [***What's So***](#whats-so)) - famous for "The map is not the territory" - teaches the difference between reality and *our understanding (interpretation) of it*. <br />
[**R. Buckminster Fuller**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buckminster_Fuller) (Werner Erhard was directly inspired by Fuller, who taught about ***integrity***, design science, and “doing more with less”) <br />
[**Edmund Husserl**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmund_Husserl) and ***phenomenology*** (the rigorous study of concious *experience as it appears*) influenced 20th-century existential thought ([***Occur***](#occur)) <br />
[**Epictetus**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epictetus) (***Stoicism***) <br />
[**Humberto Maturana**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humberto_Maturana) (***Subjectivity***, ***Observation***, and ***the Construction of Reality***.)
[**Jean-Paul Sartre**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Paul_Sartre) ([***Freedom***](#freedom) and [***Responsibility***](#responsibility)) <br />
[**The Kyoto School of Zen Philosphers**](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kyoto-school/) ([***Being***](#being)) <br /> 
[**Ludwig Wittgenstein**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_Wittgenstein) ([***Distinctions***](#distinction) and [***Story***](#story)) <br />
[**Marcus Aurelius**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Aurelius) ([***At Cause***](#at-cause) and [***At Effect***](#at-effect) come from ***Stoicism***) <br />
[**Martin Heidegger**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Heidegger) probably one of Erhard's biggest influences in the early days of forming est - ([***Being***](#being), [***Ontology***](#ontology)) <br />
[**Seneca**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seneca_the_Younger) (his letters are studied in Stoicism as they encouraged *self-master*, *choice*, and *detachment from circumstances* as paths to equanimity) <br />
[**Taoism**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taoism) (Taoist notion that events are empty until we give them meaning resonates with Taoist themes of ***wu wei*** (non-forcing) and the idea of “allowing” or “not resisting” [***what is***](#whats-so)) <br />
[William Glasser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Glasser) Psychiatrist author of [Reality Therapy](https://www.amazon.com/Reality-Therapy-Approach-Psychiatry-Colophon/dp/0060904143) ([***What's So***](#whats-so))
[**Zen**](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/japanese-zen/) ([***Being***](#Being), [***Ontology***](#ontology))

#### 4. I read somewhere that est borrows a lot, or steals, from Scientology. Is that true?

**A:** <br />

While Werner Erhard was involved with [**Scientology**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientology) for a brief period, the extent of direct influence on **est** is debated. Many see parallels in the intense group sessions, the focus on *personal* ***responsibility***, and the breakdown of *personal narratives*. Erhard himself has denied using or taking any training materials from Scientology, and his answer has always been that est training should be seen as a compilation (or distillation) of many disciplines. <br /> 

Others note major conceptual differences (e.g. no emphasis on “thetans” or “reactive mind,” for instance). Having read a little about **Scientology** myself, and having spoken with an ex-Scientology member, I think it's the case that L. Ron Hubbard himself was already repackaging things from other philosophies and disciplines.  Which, in my view, lets est and Werner Erhard off-the-hook for borrowing or "stealing" from Scientology.  Still, some writers have listed Erhard's exposure to Scientology materials that led launching **est**.  I think it's no big secret that L. Ron Hubbard cribbed many concepts and teachings, from people I listed in the previous FAQ answer, when he wrote "*Dianetics*" and internal **Scientology** courses. I think maybe credit to Erhard, though, for not trying to create a *religion* from his own repackaging of philosopher works. 🙃 <br /> <br /> 

#### 5. What are other sites, beyond this one, where I can read about Landmark Forum?  

**A:** <br />

Well there's always the official [**Landmark Worldwide**](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com) site, but for reviews or write-ups I enjoyed the following articles below.  Several unvarnished opinions, critiques, etc as well.  <br />

[**A Skeptic Goes to the Landmark Forum**](https://fortelabs.com/blog/a-skeptic-goes-to-the-landmark-forum/) <br />
[**The Landmark Forum: 42 Hours, $500, 65 Breakdowns**](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2009/08/landmark-42-hours-500-65-breakdowns/) <br />
[**A Review and Summary of the Landmark Forum**](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BrF3jGCHnNm9iCCxp/a-review-and-summary-of-the-landmark-forum) <br />
[**My Review of Landmark Forum**](https://ozchen.com/landmark-forum-review/) <br />
[**My Landmark Forum Review: The Good, The Bad, and The Boring**](https://nickgray.net/landmark-forum/) <br />
[**Landmark Education A Cult? (Not Even Close)**](https://nickglassett.com/landmark-education-cult/) <br />
[**The Landmark Forum — a rationalist's first impression**](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/s4JE7cNqxqwxFmFe2/the-landmark-forum-a-rationalist-s-first-impression) <br />
[**Landmark Forum: Mysterious training course coming to your office**](https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/real-life/news-life/landmark-forum-mysterious-training-course-coming-to-your-office/news-story/59b95a445f1049228b8ea7863ac183f3) <br />
[**You’re O.K., but I’m Not. Let’s Share.**](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/28/fashion/28Landmark.html) <br />
[**Being zen at work**](https://www.peterjthomson.com/2012/01/zen-at-work/) <br />
[**Get Confident, Stupid!**](https://www.gq.com/story/landmark-forum-get-confident-stupid-gq-may-2005) <br />
[**I thought I'd be brainwashed. But how wrong could I be...**](https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/dec/14/ameliahill.theobserver) <br />
[**The Return of Werner Erhard**](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/29/fashion/the-return-of-werner-erhard-father-of-self-help.html) <br />
[**Founder of est Targeted in Campaign by Scientologists**](https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1991-12-29-mn-2102-story.html)

#### 6. There really aren't *a lot* of books or official public documents about the original [est](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erhard_Seminars_Training), or about **Landmark** (or even books published *by* [**Landmark Worldwide**](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com) *itself*).  Are there any kind of books you can point me to, aside from the online articles and write-ups you gave here?

**A:** <br />

It's true there aren't a lot of books written about est and Landmark.  The seminars and training curriculum of both were meant to be provided in specific contexts which centered around an active dialog within a group setting.  So not a lot of written materials were really ever provided for est seminars or advanced courses (same with Landmark).  Since the training depended to a great extent on group dynamics, privacy for participants dictated that filming of entire seminars never be allowed.  Other than a few excerpts allowed by Erhard (and some, later, by Landmark in their marketing), it is nigh impossible to truly "*read about all the concepts*" (or get a blow-by-blow) of the training.  Like est before, Landmark believes you have to *experience* the Forum's dialog and flow, not read about it. But if you're willing to hunt down some out-of-print books from the 70s about est (some of which had input from est trainers, and [Werner Erhard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Erhard) himself) there is some interesting reading out there: <br /> 

[Est: Erhard Seminars Training: 60 Hours That Transform Your Life](https://www.amazon.com/Est-Erhard-Seminars-Training-Transform/dp/0380006979) by Adelaide Bry <br />
[EST: Playing The Game* The New Way](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0615547001/) by Carl L. Frederick <br />
[est, Tools For Life, Transformation, And The Western Mind](https://www.amazon.com/Tools-Life-Transformation-Western-Mind/dp/B0C5P9M12P) by Ernie Schultze <br />
[Speaking Being: Werner Erhard, Martin Heidegger, and a New Possibility of Being Human](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1119549906) by Bruce Hyde and Drew Kopp <br />
[The Book of Est](https://www.amazon.com/Book-Est-Luke-Rhinehart/dp/0557306159) by Luke Rhinehart <br />
[Werner Erhard The Transformation of a Man: The Founding of EST](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0517535025) by William Warren Bartley III <br />

#### 7. Those books you listed are *pro-EST* and *pro-Werner*: can you *also* give books and resources *critical* of EST, Erhard, or Landmark?

**A:** <br />

I only personally know of two books that discuss problems with Est/Landmark and their founder—one I just discovered in late 2024: "*Is This A Cult?*". A great read that I highly-recommend and will be doing book review, on this blog in the coming weeks.  <br /> 

I definitely do *not* want to be seen excluding critical voices about Landmark; *however*, there is no shortage of critical voices—and I don't want to be favoring critics *or* fans of the organization.  If you have an additional material to suggest, please feel free contact me and send any suggestions for this FAQ item.<br />

[Is This A Cult?](https://isthisacultbook.com) <br />
[Outrageous Betrayal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outrageous_Betrayal) <small> &#42;labeled as "defamatory" by representatives of Werner Erhard and Landmark Worldwide. </small> <br />
[Rick Ross-Cult Education Network](https://www.culteducation.com)

#### 8. What is Landmark up to, today?

**A:** <br />

I really didn't keet up with **Landmark** after I attended ***The Landmark Forum*** in 1994, though I have friends who volunteered for them.  The last thing I personally heard was they entered [Bankruptcy protection—and were preparing to emerge from that](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/landmark-worldwide-nears-completion-difficult-020000623.html) with new leadership in 2024.  *Beyond that*, I would direct you to [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com) on what they're up to now. <br />

#### 9. I am contemplating attending *The Landmark Forum* or similar transformational group training.  What advice could you give me?

**A:** <br />

I 100% believe in [***informed consent***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Informed_consent) regarding **The Landmark Forum** or *any* similar personal-development group; however, such a consequential decision is yours—and ultimately ***only yours***. **Beware people giving you sensational or polarizing statements or advice**—especially from a "*should*" or "*should not*" standpoint. You deserve a nuanced and *thorough* assesment, when seeking such advice. I would recommend [my 3 posts about it](#preface) from a few years ago, and there are books listed FAQ items above.  If you are just starting-out reading about **Landmark**, inform yourselve *before* making a commitment to participate in **The Landmark Forum**.  <br /> 

I would also advise that if you *do* decide to attend **The Landmark Forum**—which can be a positive experience—I am of the opinion that ***moderation*** *after* attending **The Landmark Forum** is the *best* approach.  This means promising yourself to ***not*** sign-up for any further courses for a period of time after attending.  This just my *own personal-recommendation* for anyone who attending **The Landmark Forum** for the first time: I believe it's *healthiest* to *not rush* right into additional follow-on courses, or to volunteer for **Landmark Worldwide**, after Graduating. Stop first—*pause*—and give yourself *time to process* the insights, distinctions, or transformation that you may have experienced ***first***. <--- ***that*** is the **best advice** I can ever give.  The volunteer-pipeline at Landmark has many valid criticisms, and I think it's healthy to never *rush-into anything* no matter *how positive* the experience was.  **Give yourself the *respect* and *self-care* of integrating your breakthroughs-*first***! ***Note***: I can't really comment on the new "**Landmark WorldWide New Era, LLC**" post-bankrupcty entity—they may be trying to change their negative practices concerning volunteers (I don't know, so I advise caution). <br />

#### 10. I am recovering from a negative experience with Landmark or other self-help organization.  Do you know of, or can you recommend, any resources that I can reach out to?

**A:** <br />

Yes, **I wholeheartedly *recommend*** [SEEK Safely](https://www.seeksafely.org), and I wish you the very best in your journey and healing.  <br />

#### 11. How is Landmark able to claim that they have a special "*Technology*", when it just seems to be terms and concepts that were *repackaged* from Philosohpers' existing phenomenological, ontological, and epistemological works?

**A:** <br />

1. **In a word: Lawyers**.  Every seminar, every meeting...every time & place Werner Erhard spoke in a room is *considered* by him (and Landmark founders) as "*the work*" and the "*Technology*".  And Erhard and Tekniko (and by proxy Landmark or anyone who holds licenses to "*the work*") attempt to take his special *generative* use of language -- and legally say he owns it.  Part of why philosophical works, sciences, and economics are taught in college is because generally none of those things are copywritten *owned* "*terms of art*".  These things, taught in an [LGAT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training) format can be extremely impactful.  And it's likely why Erhard made a push into academia in the past decade and a half.

2. You can leverage NLP techniques to frame (and reframe) concepts into entire *schools of though*—and have it *work*. This isn't a unique or novel thing, and is in fact what mankind has done with various Philosophies and knowledge systems for centuries. 

3. A simple *possible* truth of **Landmark**'s "*Technology*" is that a very smart man (who left his family in the 60s to reboot his life) simply liked to read and think deeply a lot...then he got briefly involved in Mind Dynamics and Scientology (which themselves were uneven repackagings of Philosphical concepts)...and he had a series of epiphanies that led him to *enroll* others into working with him to create "*the mother of all modern* [*LGATs*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large-group_awareness_training) called [est](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erhard_Seminars_Training)."  I can't say that's *how* **Landmark** arrived at viewing this stuff as a *precious Technological product*—it's just one possibility. 🤷🏻 

#### 12. I practiced **Buddhism** before I attended a Landmark Forum, and I am thoroughly confused about "*Empty and Meaningless*" exercise and concept.  It doesn't feel anything like "Emptiness" (śūnyatā) that I was taught. I don't feel like it matches what I learned, at all, and I need to figure out if I want to even benefit from Landmark's separate distinction of this concept. Can you help?

**A:** <br />

Let me see if I can help, but to unravel this it's a bit of a long one: because I am a non-practicing student of **Buddhism**, and I had actually learned **Landmark**'s "*Empty and Meaningless*" concepts *before* I learned the **Buddhist** concept of "Emptiness" (śūnyatā).  Below is what I figured out, for myself (though [your mileage may vary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/your_mileage_may_vary)). <br /> 

First point: "*emptiness*" is just one of a few frameworks in **Landmark** where Ontological vs. Psychological concepts can get confusing. You could complete the entire 3-day / 1-night **Landmark Forum**, and probably still walk away not 100% "***getting it***" on the "*Empty and Meaningless*" thing, possibly only to "***pop***" later. This would be ***especially likely*** for someone who already has experience with the Buddhist school of thought about "*emptiness*"!  <br />

In **Buddhism**, “Emptiness” typically refers to the lack of inherent, independent existence in all phenomena. It is an **ontological** statement about the nature of reality—namely, that everything arises interdependently and has no essential “self-nature” or static essence.  While this can have psychological implications (reducing attachment, fostering compassion), it’s first and foremost an insight into how all phenomena are—***impermanent***, ***interdependent***, and ***non-separate***. <br />

Buddhists do not typically say “*life is meaningless*.” Instead, they emphasize that events have no intrinsic essence or “self.” Because of that, any “meaning” or “value” is ultimately dependent upon causes, conditions, and human conceptual frameworks. This doesn’t equate to nihilism (most people take "Emptiness" to be that, it isn't); rather, it’s a “[***Middle Way***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Middle_Way)” approach that recognizes phenomena are “empty” of permanent identity while still acknowledging the role of relative meaning, ethics, and compassion. <br />

Realizing "Emptiness" in the ***Buddhist sense*** helps practitioners *let go* of ***attachments*** and ***aversion***—the root causes of **suffering** (***dukkha***). It's about Liberation from *clinging*, in **Buddhism**. By seeing that everything is contingent and fluid, one can approach life with greater equanimity and compassion. "Emptiness" is typically explored via *meditative practices* (insight into the nature of the mind and phenomena) and an ethical lifestyle (the [Eightfold Path](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noble_Eightfold_Path)). It’s closely linked to compassion (***karuṇā***) because *realizing* interdependence can heighten empathy for all beings. <br />

Okay, so that's ***Buddhism***'s "Emptiness" -- now let's contrast against **Landmark's** completely *different* concept: <br />

Landmark uses "***Empty and Meaningless***" to highlight the ***interpretive nature*** of *human thought*—it’s an ***epistemological*** and ***psychological*** *tool*: to **show that *meaning* is *constructed***. **Buddhism** uses “Emptiness” to describe the ***ontological*** state of all phenomena (lack of inherent essence) and to guide practitioners toward liberation from *clinging* and *illusion*. <br />

In **Landmark** the "***Empty and Meaningless***" exercise is largely about noticing how we *add meaning* to events, culminating in personal breakthroughs around identity, responsibility, and communication.  In **Buddhism** "Emptiness" teachings are about a broader path tht includes ethical precepts, meditation, and the pursuit of *enlightenment* (ending suffering).  So **Landmark**'s “***Empty and meaningless***” *distinction* is for liberation from *self-created* "***stories***" so you can create meaning aligned with your commitments. Buddhist "Emptiness" is about recognizing no fixed essence. Both **Landmark**'s and **Buddhism**'s concepts can each be mistaken for nihilism if misunderstood, but for *both* these concepts are about *freedom*.  In **Landmark** it's being free from our ***stories*** and negative interpretations.  In **Buddhism** it points to freedom, compassion, and wisdom.  <br />

Both **Landmark** and certain **Zen**/insight traditions emphasize "*letting go*" of rigid interpretations or mental constructs that keep one *stuck*. In *both* frameworks practitioners discover that much of what we experience as “*reality*” is colored by our projections, narratives, and mental filters. Recognizing these filters is a step toward greater clarity and freedom.

#### 13. What is "*Transformation*", in the sense of Est and Landmark?  Is it real or even possible?

**When you make a personal breakthrough or gain a new insight**—the more *sudden* it feels, the *word* **Landmark** tells you you're experiencing: is "*Transformation*".  I disagree, and I split from **Landmark** and all self-help culture on this matter of "*Transformation*." <br /> 

There are a lot of clumsy words we can use when we identify new and life-impacting *distinctions*, insights, or personal epiphanies. But this notion—that you’re a flawed person whose life doesn't work....and “you’ll *only* get different and positive results when you "*become a different person*” is problematic for me.  You *might seem transformed* externally to *othe*r* people, but you’re still the same person. Self-help culture has conditioned people that you’ll must *transformed*— that the only way you will "*get*" what they are offering is to become a different person.  I believe to *grow* and internalize the useful *tools* given by **Landmark**—we should be practicing *radical-acceptance* of who we are. <br />

**Landmark** wants to "*Transform the World*" through "*the work*", or their "*Technology*"—so they internally believe you're a *different* person after The **Landmark Forum**. ***I*** believe, flaws and all...and despite our painful "***stories***" and experiences in life: we are already a ***whole person***. We work with what we have, and we bring our full selves to our lives and our work—but I find **Landmark**'s promise that you'll “be transformed” from distinctions and insights, and the valid epiphanies you can gain, a bridge too far.  You were a *human being* ***before*** new learnings, and you are a *human being* ***after*** new learnings.  <br /> 

So that's where ***I*** land, on the whole "*Transformation*" thing. 😊 *Totally okay* if [your mileage varies on that](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/your_mileage_may_vary)!  😉  Growth is powerful, and fast growth even more powerful *still*, so I understand why LGATs use that word—but I think it's clumsy, a bit of a *hook* for the for-profit self-help companies out there—and so I just don't hold with it.  

#### 14. I hear Landmark is very litigious.  Are you concerned about Landmark or Tekniko challenging you over the contents of this page?  

**A:** <br />

**Before publishing this informal and unofficial Glossary, I consulted legal counsel so as to respect Landmark's products, brand, and terminology**.  ***Three key items*** **anyone should consider before attempting any formal allegations or claims**: <br />

1. **I have never worked in or for the self-help / personal-development trade, nor have I worked as a personal coach**—and so I have *never used*, *taught*, or infringed on **Landmark's** products, training, or "*Technology*" (which includes English language terms and published works / concepts of the Philosophers listed in this FAQ). I fully respect and honor **Landmark's** products, and make no claim of ownership to any of their terminology. <br />

2. **I have worked over two decades in the legal technology services industry, employed by two prolific law firms**. I have retained and maintain active counsel for *any* matters arising from the simple *writing-down* of words from the English language on this page.  <br /> 

3. **As an established and respected [Project Manager](https://www.linkedin.com/in/julianwest/) in my industry** I don't do *anything* without managing risk—*and I believe in contingency strategy*: besides minimizing my legal exposure, I also maintain an in-depth and thorough list for targeted Discovery requests—which my counsel would *aggressively pursue with unlimited resources*—if I am ever challenged legally on the *meanings of words*. *Trust*. The terms on this informal and *unofficial* Glossary have *never* been claimed or represented as owned by me, and my constructive criticism of Landmark have been *well-known* beyond this 2024 web page, for over a decade.  I direct readers to my [**Disclaimer**](#disclaimer) for anything further on this.  <br />

I fully respect **Landmark** trademarks, and intend *no infringements*; however I am also prepared to assert that no injury could possibly occur—from publishing an informal list of English language specialized terms.  See my [**Disclaimer**](#disclaimer) for anything further. <br />

Terms or phrases with "&trade;" or "&reg;" are *trademarked* or *registered* properties of [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), are openly used in their public literature, and are only referenced here for complete Definitions.  All rights to these terms belong to Landmark Education and [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com), and *no authorship or ownership*—to any material in this unofficial Glossary—is claimed in *any* way! 

#### IMPORTANT NOTE: The terms and definitions on this page are my own work product (using aforementioned resources) and are ***not*** reviewed or approved by [Landmark Worldwide](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com).

#### DISCLAIMER: The views expressed on this blog are my personal views, and are not the views of Landmark. Brand and product names are trademarks, or registered trademarks, of their respective owners.  Refer to this site's [Terms of Use](https://julianwest.me/Blog/site-disclosure/) for further details.