+++
date = '2017-12-01T20:10:26-06:00'
draft = false
title = 'Thoughts On Project Management: 2017 Edition'
type = 'post'
tags = ["tech", "devops", "enterprise-it", "opinion", "project-mgmt", "thought", "career", "best-of"]
+++

Having managed IT projects for over a decade now, and ringing the bell on the PMP, I have come to appreciate my <i>non-agile</i> experience, as a lost art.  Here are a few *hot-sports-opinions* I have developed over the years about PM'ing projects in professonal services firms. <br />

IT middle-managers tend to mis-identify IT contractors and outside project augmentation as "consultants", and it means they have probably never worked with a top-notch consultant. In tech, <i>Contractors</i> deliver to defined requirements (that is, whenever companies bother to define them). A consultant is ***subject-matter expertise*** and **experience** both wrapped-up in an advisory secret-weapon role, when you have good ones.  They are not there to manage your project, though some can.  No, *best* consultants are there to help you get your blueprint and scope properly-defined (in my experience). Any good PM can pick-up what a consultant is laying-down, and turn that into a proper Scope and WBS.  You can always tell the good subject-matter experts who consult by their past work, and their rates.  I have inhabited both the SME and PM role, and never at the same time.  And if you want me to give you direction/advisement AND scope out your project AND do some or all of the work...you *better* not be shopping on-the-cheap. <br />

"Expert" Project Managers working on major user-facing stuff, who obsesses on their spec'ed a RACI chart, are busy giving you an EVA during the final phase, and insist on a written a Charter before discusing any kind of Scope -- they may be fantastic practitioners but they are likely not going to get your rollout done on-time and under-budget. In financial and legal IT, results and outcomes are the north-star.  And results are often de-tethered from costs, when winning a major case or deploying a new SOX-compliant system is involved. And any process and data-driven PM should read the room, when working for those those kinds of Orgs. <br />

Of leader styles in IT and Project Management, I tend to prefer servant-leaders. Extremely helpful and in the trenches with you, getting the work done. Removing obstacles.  BUT there are risks and downsides to having *only* that leadership style: while constantly augmenting you and helping with logistical issues, helping you with tasks, a servant leader PM can lose focus on larger risks facing the project.  They also can go blind to culture / environmental blind spots with how the project is going, and how stakeholders are measuring the results.  <br /> So...

...sometimes leading takes a backseat.  Instead of *Servant Leader mode*, sometimes your leadership style must pivot to what I call: "*Coach Mode*".  You are there *not* to be the "I wouldn't ask my team to do what I couldn't do..." PM, but the "here's the 59 yard line, and here's a playbook we need to follow to get there" and you mentor / inspire / fight for team focus.  You're not *doing* some of the work in that WBS, but you sure as hell are motivating people and getting that 10,000 ft view that PMs sometimes need, to avoid stakeholder blind spots.  A good modern PM, especially decent Agile ones, can pivot between these styles quickly depending on the context. <br />

Another risk for SME style PMs, who may have a lot of technical experience before they became a PM: finishing tasks, and checking off items in the work tracking log, can harm your team's energy.  Sure you got a task deliverable done, but your subordinates can end up feeling side-lined or second-guessed. When all you care about is getting tasks done, you aren't fully-managing the project resources propertly and you're also not developing a great team to bring it home.  So the Servant Leader style, while very important, needs the kinds of leaders who know when to take a step back, and ask: "in addition to ensuring the work is *done*, how can I make sure I don't invalidate others' judgement while also meeting our delivery timeline."  Taking a step back from being in the thick of the active work can empower your team, and leaves you free for the other high-touch challenges in a project (tracking budget and EV, managing crises, addressing grievances, etc). <br />

I second this concept of leadership style pivots, for IT middle managers as well (of which I am one, when not managing projects): purely only helping your people do tasks all the time, isn't always the leadership they need. <br />

Project Managers want the best possible resource team members to deliver a projeect undertaking.  And great Subject Matter Experts deserve great Project Managers who can make that leadership style pivot.  Whether that SME is a consultant, or an engineer in your company, empower them and get out of their way.  You'll find you will hardly ever have to hold them responsible for a missed deadline or have to crash the Schedule for them.  And in the end, your whole team iterate quickly and nail milestone after milestone. 